           Phonology 6 (1989) 201-251
           Printed in Great Britain




           Articulatory gestures as
           phonological units*
           Catherine P. Browman
           Haskins Laboratories
           Louis Goldstein
           Yale University



            1 A gestural phonology
           Over the past few years, we have been investigating a particular hypothesis
           about the nature of the basic ' atoms' out of which phonological structures
           are formed. The atoms are assumed to be primitive actions of the vocal
           tract articulators that we call 'gestures'. Informally, a gesture is identified
           with the formation (and release) of a characteristic constriction within one
           of the relatively independent articulatory subsystems of the vocal tract
           (i.e. oral, laryngeal, velic). Within the oral subsystem, constrictions can be
           formed by the action of one of three relatively independent sets of
           articulators: the lips, the tongue/blade and the tongue body. As actions,
           gestures have some intrinsic time associated with them — they are charac-
           terisations of movements through space and over time (see Fowler et al.
           1980).
              Within the view we are developing, phonological structures are stable
           'constellations' (or 'molecules', to avoid mixing metaphors) assembled
           out of these gestural atoms. In this paper, we examine some of the
           evidence for, and some of the consequences of, the assumption that
           gestures are the basic atoms of phonological structures. First, we attempt
           to establish that gestures are pre-linguistic discrete units of action that are
           inherent in the maturation of a developing child and that therefore can be
           harnessed as elements of a phonological system in the course of de-
           velopment (§1.1). We then give a more detailed, formal characterisation of
           gestures as phonological units within the context of a computational
           model (§ 1.2), and show that a number of phonological regularities can be
           captured by representing constellations of gestures (each having inherent
           duration) using gestural scores (§1.3). Finally, we show how the proposed
           gestural structures relate to proposals of feature geometry (§§2-3).



                                                                 201
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
            202      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
            I.I Gestures as pre-linguistic primitives
           Gestures are units of action that can be identified by observing the
           coordinated movements of vocal tract articulators. That is, repeated
           observations of the production of a given utterance will reveal a charac-
           teristic pattern of constrictions being formed and released. The fact that
           these patterns of (discrete) gestures are similar in structure to the non-
           linear phonological representations being currently postulated (e.g.
           Clements 1985; Sagey 1986; Hayes 1986), together with some of the
           evidence presented in Browman & Goldstein (1986, in press), leads us
           to make the strong hypothesis that gestures themselves constitute basic
           phonological units. This hypothesis has the attractive feature that the
           basic units of phonology can be identified directly with cohesive patterns
           of movement within the vocal tract. Thus, the phonological system is built
           out of inherently discrete units of action. This state of affairs would be par-
           ticularly useful for a child learning to speak. If we assume that discrete
           gestures (like those that will eventually function as phonological units)
           emerge in the child's behavioural repertoire in advance of any specifically
           linguistic development, then it is possible to view phonological de-
           velopment as harnessing these action units to be the basic units of
           phonological structures.
              The idea that pre-linguistic gestures are employed in the service of
           producing early words has been proposed and supported by a number of
           writers, for example, Fry (1966), Locke (1983), Studdert-Kennedy (1987)
           and Vihman (in press), where what we identify as 'gestures' are referred
           to as ' articulatory routines' or the like. The view we are proposing extends
           this approach by hypothesising that these pre-linguistic gestures actually
           become the units of contrast. Additional phonological developments
           involve differentiating and tuning the gestures, and developing patterns
           of intergestural coordination that correspond to larger phonological
           structures.
              The evidence that gestures are pre-linguistic units of action can be seen
           in the babbling behaviour of young infants. The descriptions of infant
           babbling (ages 6-12 months) suggest a predominance of what are trans-
           cribed as simple CV syllables (Locke 1986; Oiler & Eilers 1982). The
           'consonantal' part of these productions can be analysed as simple, gross,
           constriction manoeuvres of the independent vocal tract subsystems and
           (within the oral subsystem) the separate oral articulator sets. For example,
           based on frequency counts obtained from a number of studies, Locke
           (1983) finds that the consonants in (1) constitute the 'core' babbling
           inventory: these 12 ' consonants' account for about 95 % of the babbles of
           English babies. Similar frequencies obtain in other language envi-
           ronments :
               (1) h b d g               ptk        mn        jw       s
              These transcriptions are not meant to be either systematic phonological
            representations (the child doesn't have a phonology yet) or narrow

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                       Articulatory gestures as phonological units 203
           phonetic transcriptions (the child cannot be producing the detailed units
           of its 'target' language, because, as noted below, there do not seem to be
           systematic differences in the babbles produced by infants in different
           language environments). Others have noted the problems inherent in
           using a transcription that assumes a system of units and relations to
           describe a behaviour that lacks such a system (e.g. Kent & Murray 1982;
           Oiler 1986; Koopmans-van Beinum & van der Stelt 1986; Studdert -
           Kennedy 1987). As Studdert-Kennedy (1987) argues, it seems likely that
           these transcriptions reflect the production by the infant of simple vocal
           constriction gestures, of the kind that evolve into mature phonological
           structures (which is why adults can transcribe them using their phono-
           logical categories). Thus, / h / can be interpreted as a laryngeal widening
           gesture and /b d g/ as 'gross' constriction gestures of the three in-
           dependent oral articulator sets (lips, tongue tip and tongue body), /p t k/
           combine the oral constriction gestures with the laryngeal manoeuvre, and
           /m n/ combine oral constrictions with velic lowering. These combinations
           do not necessarily indicate an ability on the part of the infant to coordinate
           the gestures. Rather, any accidental temporal coincidence of two such
           gestures would be perceived by the listener as the segments in question.
              The analysis outlined above suggests that babbling involves the emer-
           gence, in the infant, of simple constriction gestures of independent parts of
           the vocal tract. As argued by Locke (1986), the pattern of emergence of
           these actions can be viewed as a function of anatomical and neuro-
           physiological developments, rather than the beginning of language
           acquisition per se. This can be seen, first of all, in the fact that the babbling
           inventory and its developmental sequence have not been shown to vary as
           a function of the particular language environment in which the child finds
           itself (although individual infants may vary considerably from one another
           in the relative frequencies of particular gestures - Studdert-Kennedy
           1987; Vihman in press). In fact, in the large number of studies reviewed
           by Locke (1983), there appear to be no detectable differences (either
           instrumentally or perceptually) in the 'consonantal' babbling of infants
           reared in different language environments. (More recent studies have
           found some language environment effect on the overall long term
           spectrum of vocalic utterances (de Boysson-Bardies et al. 1986), and on
           prosody (de Boysson-Bardies et al. 1984). Other subtle effects may be
           uncovered with improvement of analytic techniques.)
              Secondly, Locke (1983) notes that the developmental changes in
           frequency of particular babbled consonants can likely be explained by
           anatomical developments. Most of the consonants produced by very
           young infants (less than six months) involve tongue body constrictions,
           usually transcribed as velars. Some time shortly after the beginning of
           repetitive canonical babbling (usually in the seventh month), tongue tip
           and lip constrictions begin to outnumber tongue body constrictions, with
           tongue tip constrictions eventually dominating. Even deaf infants show a
           progression that is qualitatively similar, at least in early stages, although
           their babbling can be distinguished from that of hearing infants on a

                                                                                           PHO 6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           204 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           number of acoustic measures (Oiler & Eilers 1988). Locke suggests an
           explanation in terms of vocal tract maturation. At birth, the infant's larynx
           is high, and the tongue virtually fills the oral cavity (Lieberman 1984).
           This would account for the early dominance of tongue body constrictions.
           After the larynx drops, tongue tip and lip constrictions - without sim-
           ultaneous tongue constrictions — are more readily formed. In particular,
           the closing action of the mandible will then contribute to constrictions at
           the front of the mouth.
              Finally, Locke (1986) notes that the timing of the development of
           repetitive 'syllabic' babbling coincides with the emergence of repetitive
           motor behaviours generally. He cites Thelen's (1981) observation of 47
           different rhythmic activities that have their peak frequency at 6-7 months.
           Locke concludes (1986: 145) that 'it thus appears that the syllabic
           patterning of babble - like the phonetic patterning of its segments - is
           determined mostly by nonlinguistic developments of vocal tract anatomy
           and neurophysiology'.
              The pre-linguistic vocal gestures become linguistically significant when
           the child begins to produce its first few words. The child seems to notice
           the similarity of its babbled patterns to the speech s/he hears (Locke
           1986), and begins to produce 'words' (with apparent referential meaning)
           using the available set of vocal gestures. It is possible to establish that
           there is a definite relationship between the (non-linguistic) gestures of
           babbling and the gestures employed in early words by examining in-
           dividual differences among children. Vihman et al. (1985) and Vihman (in
           press) find that the particular consonants that were produced with high
           frequency in the babbling of a given child also appear with high frequency
           in that child's early word productions. Thus, the child is recruiting its
           well-practised action units for a new task. In fact in some early cases
           (e.g. 'baby' words like mama, etc.), 'recruiting' is too active a notion.
           Rather, parents are helping the child establish a referential function with
           sequences that already exist as part of the babbling repertoire (Locke
            1986).
              Once the child begins producing words (complex units that have to be
           distinguished one from another), using the available gestures as building
           blocks, phonology has begun to form. If we compare the child's early
           productions (using the small set of pre-linguistic gestures) to the gestural
           structure of the adult forms, it is clear that there are (at least) two
           important developments that are required to get from one to the other: (1)
           differentiation and tuning of individual gestures and (2) coordination of
           the individual gestures belonging to a given word. Let us examine these
           in turn.
              Differentiation and tuning. While the repertoire of gestures inherent in
           the consonants of (1) above employs all of the relatively independent
           articulator sets, the babbled gestures involve just a single (presumably
           gross) movement. For example, some kind of closure is involved for oral
           constriction gestures. In general, however, languages employ gestures


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                            Articulatory gestures as phonological units 205
           produced with a given articulator set that contrast in the degree of
           constriction. That is, not only are closure gestures produced but also
           fricative and wider (approximant) gestures. In addition, the exact location
           of the constriction formed by a given articulator set may contrast, e.g. in
           the gestures for / 9 / , / s / and /J/. Thus, a single pre-linguistic constriction
           gesture must eventually differentiate into a variety of potentially con-
           trastive gestures, tuned with different values of constriction location and
           degree. Although the location and degree of the constriction formed by a
           given articulator set are, in principle, physical continua, the differentiated
           gestures can be categorically distinct. The partitioning of these continua
           into discrete categories is likely aided by quantal (i.e. non-linear) artic-
           ulatory-auditory relations of the kind proposed by Stevens (1972, 1989).
           In addition, Lindblom (1986) has shown how the pressures to keep
           contrasting words perceptually distinct can lead to discrete clustering
           along some articulatory/acoustic contina. Even so, the process of dif-
           ferentiation may be lengthy. Nittrouer et al. (1989) present data on
           fricative production in American English children. They find that dif-
           ferentiation between / s / and / / / is increasing in children from ages three
           to seven, and hasn't yet reached the level shown by adults. In addition,
           tuning may occur even where differentiation is unnecessary. That is, even
           if a language has only a single tongue tip closure gesture, its constriction
           location may be tuned to a particular language-specific value. For
           example, English stops have an alveolar constriction location, while
           French stops are more typically dental.
              Coordination. The various gestures that constitute the atoms of a given
           word must be organised appropriately. There is some evidence that a child
           can know what all the relevant gestures are for some particular word, and
           can produce them all, without either knowing or being able to produce the
           appropriate organisation. Studdert-Kennedy (1987) presents an example
           of this kind from Ferguson & Farwell (1975). They list ten attempts by a
            15-month old girl to say the word pen in a half-hour session, as shown in
           (2):

               (2)     [ma3, VA, de dn , hin, m b6, p h m, t h nt h nt hn . b a h - 4hau"> b u f i ]
           While these attempts appear radically different, they can be analysed, for
           the most part, as the set of gestures that constitute pen misarranged in
           various ways: glottal opening, bilabial closure, tongue body lowering,
           alveolar closure and velum lowering. Eventually, the 'right' organisation
           is hit upon by the child. The search is presumably aided by the fact that
           the coordinated structure embodied in the target language is one of a
           relatively small number of dynamically stable patterns (see also Boucher
           1988). The formation of such stable patterns may ultimately be illumi-
           nated by research into stable modes in coordinated human action in
           general (e.g. Haken et al. 1985; Schmidt et al. 1987) being conducted
           within the broad context of the non-linear dynamics relevant to problems
           of pattern formation in physics and biology (e.g. Thompson & Stewart

                                                                                                       9-2

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           206 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           1976; Glass & Mackey 1988). In addition, aspects of coordination may
           emerge as the result of keeping a growing number of words perceptually
           distinct using limited articulatory resources (Lindblom et al. 1983).
              If phonological structures are assumed to be organised patterns of
           gestural units, a distinct methodological bonus obtains: the vocal be-
           haviour of infants, even pre-linguistic behaviour, can be described using
           the same primitives (discrete units of vocal action) that are used to
           describe the fully elaborated phonological system of adults. This allows
           the growth of phonological form to be precisely monitored, by observing
           the development of the primitive gestural structures of infants into the
           elaborated structures of adults (Best & Wilkenfield 1988 provide an
           example of this). In addition, some of the thorny problems associated with
           the transcription of babbling can be obviated. Discrete units of action are
           present in the infant, and can be so represented, even if adult-like
           phonological structures have not yet developed. A similar advantage
           applies to describing various kinds of' disordered' speech (e.g. Kent 1983 ;
           Marshall et al. 1988), which may lack the organisation shown in 'normal'
           adult phonology, making conventional phonological/phonetic tran-
           scriptions inappropriate, but which may, nevertheless, be composed of
           gestural primitives. Of course, all this assumes that it is possible to give an
           account of adult phonology using gestures as the basic units - it is to that
           account that we now turn.

            1.2 The nature of phonological gestures
           In conjunction with our colleagues Elliot Saltzman and Philip Rubin at
           Haskins Laboratories, we are developing a computational model that
           produces speech beginning with a representation of phonological struc-
           tures in terms of gestures (Browman et al. 1984; Browman et al. 1986;
           Saltzman et al. 1987; Browman & Goldstein 1987), where a GESTURE is
           an abstract characterisation of coordinated task-directed movements of
           articulators within the vocal tract. Each gesture is precisely defined in
           terms of the parameters of a set of equations for a 'task-dynamic'
           model (Saltzman & Kelso 1987; Saltzman 1986). When the control regime
           for a given gesture is active, the equations regulate the coordination of the
           model's articulators in such a way that the gestural 'task' (the formation
           of a specified constriction) is reached as the articulator motions unfold
           over time. Acoustic output is obtained from these articulator motions by
           means of an articulatory synthesiser (Rubin et al. 1981). The gestures for
           a given utterance are themselves organised into a larger coordinated
           structure, or constellation, that is represented in a GESTURAL SCORE
           (discussed in §1.3). The score specifies the sets of values of the dynamic
           parameters for each gesture, and the temporal intervals during which each
           gesture is active. While we use analyses of articulatory movement data to
           determine the parameter values for the gestures and gestural scores, there
           is nevertheless a striking convergence between the structures we derive
           through these analyses and phonological structures currently being
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory gestures as phonological units 207

                           tract variable                                       articulators involved
             LP   lip protrusion                                                  upper & lower lips, jaw
             LA   lip aperture                                                    upper & lower lips, jaw
             TTCL tongue tip constrict location                                   tongue tip, body, jaw
             TTCD tongue tip constrict degree                                     tongue tip, body, jaw
             TBCL tongue body constrict location                                  tongue body, jaw
             TBCD tongue body constrict degree                                    tongue body, jaw
             VEL velic aperture                                                   velum
             GLO glottal aperture                                                 glottis




                                                   «-*\ GLO
                                                               Figure I
                      Tract variables and contributing articulators of computational model.

           proposed in other frameworks (e.g. Plotkin 1976; Ewen 1982; Lass 1984;
           Clements 1985; Sagey 1986; Anderson & Ewen 1987; McCarthy 1989)-
              Within task dynamics, the goal for a given gesture is specified in terms
           of independent task dimensions, called VOCAL TRACT VARIABLES. Each tract
           variable is associated with the specific sets of articulators whose move-
           ments determine the value of that variable. For example, one such tract
           variable is Lip Aperture (LA), corresponding to the vertical distance
           between the two lips. Three articulators can contribute to changing LA:
           the jaw, vertical displacement of the lower lip with respect to the jaw, and
           vertical displacement of the upper lip. The current set of tract variables in
           the computational model, and their associated articulators, can be seen in
           Fig. 1. Within the task dynamic model, the control regime for a given

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           208 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           gesture coordinates the ongoing movements of these articulators in a
           flexible, but task-specific manner, according to the demands of other
           concurrently active gestures. The motion associated with each of a
           gesture's tract variables is specified in terms of an equation for a second-
           order dynamical system.1 The equilibrium position parameter of the
           equation xo specifies the tract variable target that will be achieved, and
           the stiffness parameter k specifies (roughly) the time required to get to
           target. These parameters are tuned differently for different gestures. In
           addition, their values can be modified by stress.
              Gestures are currently specified in terms of one or two tract variables.
           Velic gestures involve a single tract variable of aperture size, as do glottal
           gestures. Oral gestures involve pairs of tract variables that specify the
           constriction degree (LA, TTCD and TBCD) and constriction location
           (LP, TTCL and TBCL). For simplicity, we will refer to the sets of
           articulators involved in oral gestures using the name of the end-effector,
           that is, the name of the single articulator at the end of the chain of
           articulators forming the particular constriction: the LIPS for LA and LP,
           the tongue tip (TT) for gestures involving TTCD and TTCL, and the
           tongue body (TB) for gestures involving TBCD and TBCL. As noted
           above, each tract variable is modelled using a separate dynamical equation;
           however, at present the paired tract variables use identical stiffness and are
           activated and de-activated simultaneously. The damping parameter b for
           oral gestures is always set for critical damping — the gestures approach
           their targets, but do not overshoot them, or 'ring'. Thus, a given oral
           gesture is specified by the values of three parameters: target values for
           each of a pair of tract variables, and a stiffness value (used for both
           equations).
              This set of tract variables is not yet complete, of course. Other oral tract
           variables that need to be implemented include an independent tongue root
           variable (Ladefoged & Halle 1988), and (as discussed in §2.1) variables for
           controlling the shape of T T and TB constrictions as seen in the third
           dimension. Additional laryngeal variables are required to allow for pitch
           control and for vertical movement of the larynx, required, for example, for
           ejectives and implosives.
              The representations of gestures employing distinct sets of tract variables
           are categorically distinct within the system outlined here. That is, they are
           defined using different variables that correspond to different sets of
           articulators. They provide, therefore, an inherent basis for contrast among
           gestures (Browman & Goldstein in press). However, for contrasting
           gestures that employ the same tract variables, the difference between the
           gestures is in the tuned values of the continuous dynamic parameters (for
           oral gestures: constriction degree, location and stiffness). That is, unlike
           the articulator sets being used, the dynamic parameters do not inherently
           define categorically distinct classes. Nonetheless, we assume that there are
           stable ranges of parameter values that tend to contrast with one another
           repeatedly in languages (Ladefoged & Maddieson 1986; Vatikiotis-
           Bateson 1988). The discrete values might be derived using a combination

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                       Articulatory gestures as phonological units 209
           of articulatory and auditory constraints applied across the entire lexicon of
           a language, as proposed by Lindblom et al. (1983). In addition, part of the
           basis for the different ranges might reside in the non-linear relation
           between the parameter values and their acoustic consequences, as in
           Stevens' quantal theory (Stevens 1972, 1989).
              In order to represent the contrastive ranges of gestural parameter values
           in a discrete fashion, we employ a set of GESTURAL DESCRIPTORS. These
           descriptors serve as pointers to the particular articulator set involved in a
           given gesture, and to the numerical values of the dynamical parameters
           characterising the gestures. In addition, they can act as classificatory and
           distinctive features for the purposes of lexical and phonological structure.
           Every gesture can be specified by a distinct descriptor structure. This
           functional organisation can be formally represented as in (3), which relates
           the parameters of the dynamical equations to the symbolic descriptors.
           Contrasting gestures will differ in at least one of these descriptors:
               (3) Gesture = articulator set (constriction degree, constriction loca-
                              tion, constriction shape, stiffness)
                   CONSTRICTION DEGREE is always present, and refers to the xo value
                     for the constriction degree tract variables (LA, TTCD, TBCD,
                     VEL, or GLO).
                   CONSTRICTION LOCATION is relevant only for oral gestures, and
                     refers to the xo value for the constriction location tract
                     variables (LP, TTCL, or TBCL).
                   CONSTRICTION SHAPE is relevant only for oral gestures, and refers to
                     the xo value of constriction shape tract variables. It is not
                     currently implemented.
                   STIFFNESS refers to the k value of the tract variables.
              Fig. 2 displays the inventory of articulator sets and associated para-
           meters that we posit are required for a general gestural phonology. The
           parameters correspond to the particular tract variables of the model shown
           below them. Those parameters with asterisks are not currently imple-
           mented.
              For the present, we list without comment the possible descriptor values
           for the constriction degree (CD) and constriction location (CL) di-
           mensions in (4). In §2.1, we will discuss the gestural dimensions and these
           descriptors in detail, including a comparison with current proposals of
           featural geometry.
               (4)     CD descriptors: closed critical narrow mid                          wide
                       CL descriptors: protruded labial dental
                                       alveolar postalveolar palatal
                                       velar uvular pharyngeal
              In the phonology of dynamically defined articulatory gestures that we
           are developing, gestures are posited to be the atoms of phonological
           structure. It is important to note that such gestures are relatively abstract.
           That is, the physically continuous movement trajectories are analysed as

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
            2io      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein

                                       Gestures:
                             Articulator                          Dimensions
                                 Sfil

                             LIPS            ( c o n de S ree > con location,              , stiffness)
                                                     LA              LP



                                             (con degree, con location, con shape*,stiffness)
                                                TTCD          TTCL



                            TB               (con degree, con location, con shape*,stiffness)
                                                  TBCD         TBCL



                            TR*              (con degree*, con location*,                  ,stiffness*)




                            VEL              (con degree,                                  , stiffness)
                                                  VEL



                            GLO              (con degree, con location*,                   , stiffness)
                                                 GLO

                                                               Figure 2
                               Inventory of articulator sets and associated parameters.

           resulting from a set of discrete, concurrently active gestural control
           regimes. They are discrete in two senses: (1) the dynamic parameters of
           a gesture's control regime remain constant throughout the discrete
           interval of time during which the gesture is active, and (2) gestures in a
           language may differ from one another in discrete ways, as represented by
           different descriptor values. Thus, as argued in Browman & Goldstein
           (1986) and Browman & Goldstein (in press), the gestures for a given
           utterance, together with their temporal patterning, perform a dual
           function. They characterise the actual observed articulator movements
           (thus obviating the need for any additional implementation rules), and
           they also function as units of contrast (and more generally capture aspects
           of phonological patterning). As discussed in those papers, the gesture as
           a phonological unit differs both from the feature and from the segment (or

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory        gestures as phonological units   211
           root node in current feature geometries). It is a larger unit than the
           feature, being effectively a unitary constriction action, parameterised
           jointly by a linked structure of features (descriptor values). Yet it is a
           smaller unit than the segment: several gestures linked together are
           necessary to form a unit at the segmental, or higher, levels.

            1.3 Gestural scores: articulatory tiers and internal duration
           In the preceding section, gestures were denned with reference to a
           dynamical system that shapes patterns of articulatory movements. Each
           gesture possesses, therefore, not only an inherent spatial aspect (i.e. a tract
           variable goal) but also an intrinsic temporal aspect (i.e. a gestural
           stiffness). Much of the power of the gestural approach follows from these
           basic facts about gestures (combined with their abstractness), since they
           allow gestures to OVERLAP in time as well as in articulator and/or tract
           variable space (see also Fujimura 1981a, b; Bell-Berti & Harris 1981;
           Fowler 1980, 1983). In this section we show how overlap among gestures
           is represented, and demonstrate that simple changes in the patterns of
           overlap between neighbouring gestural units can automatically produce a
           variety of superficially different types of phonetic and phonological
           variation.
              Within the computational model described above, the pattern of
           organisation, or CONSTELLATION, of gestures corresponding to a given
           utterance is embodied in a set of phasing principles (see Kelso & Tuller
            1987; Nittrouer et al. 1988) that specify the spatiotemporal coordination
           of the gestures (Browman & Goldstein 1986). The pattern of intergestural
           coordination that results from applying the phasing principles, along with
           the interval of active control for individual gestures, is displayed in a two-
           dimensional GESTURAL SCORE, with articulatory tiers on one dimension and
           temporal information on the other (Browman & Goldstein 1987; Brow-
           man et al. 1986). A gestural score for the word palm (pronounced [pam])
           is displayed in Fig. 3a. As can be seen in the figure, the tiers in a gestural
           score, on the vertical axis, represent the sets of articulators (or the relevant
           subset thereof) employed by the gestures, while the horizontal dimension
           codes time.
              The boxes in Fig. 3a correspond to individual gestures, labelled by their
           descriptor values for constriction degree and constriction location (where
           relevant). For example, the initial oral gesture is a bilabial closure,
           represented as a constriction of the LIPS, with a [closed] constriction
           degree, and a [labial] constriction location. The horizontal extent of each
           box represents the interval of time during which that particular gesture is
           active. During these activation intervals, which are determined in the
           computational model from the phasing principles and the inherent
           stiffnesses of each gesture, the particular set of dynamic parameter values
           that defines each gesture is actively contributing to shaping the movements
           of the model articulators. In Fig. 3b, curves are added that show the time-
           varying tract variable trajectories generated by the task dynamic model


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           212 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein


                       VEL                                                                 wide



                       TB                                           narrow
                                                                  pharyngeal
              (a)
                                             do                                              do
                       LIPS                labial                                          labial


                       GLO                       wide


                                                                                             m      ]




                       VEL


                       TB
                         (TBCD)
             (b)
                       LIPS
                           (LA)



                      GLO
                                                  100           200              300        400
                                                                      TIME (MS)

                                                                                            m       1
                                                              Figure 3
                    Gestural score for palm [pam] using box notation, (a) Activation intervals
                    only; (b) model generated tract variable motions added.

           according to the parameters indicated by the boxes. For example, during
           the activation interval of the initial labial closure, the curve representing
           LA (the vertical distance between the lips) decreases. As can be seen in
           these curves, the activation intervals directly capture something about the
           durations of the movements of the gestures;
             Fig. 4 presents an alternative symbolic redisplay2 of the gestural score.
           Instead of the ' box' notation of Fig. 3, a ' point' notation is employed that

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory gestures as phonological units 213


             VEL


             TB


             LIPS


              GLO

                                                            'palm* [poun]
                                                              Figure 4
                   Gestural score for palm [pam] using point notation, with association lines
                   added.

           references only the gestural descriptors and relative timing of their
           ' targets'. The extent of activation of the gestures in the box notation is not
           indicated. In addition, association lines between the gestures have been
           added. These lines indicate which gestures are phased with respect to each
           other. Thus, the display is a shorthand representation of the phasing rules
           discussed in Browman & Goldstein (1987). The pair of gestures connected
           by a given association line are coordinated so that a specified phase of one
           gesture is synchronised with some phase of the other. For example, the
           peak opening of the GLO [wide] gesture (180 degrees) is synchronised
           with the release phase (290 degrees) of the LIPS [clo labial] gesture. Also
           important for the phase rules is the projection of oral constriction gestures
           onto separate Vowel and Consonant tiers, which are not shown here
           (Browman & Goldstein 1987, 1988; see also Keating 1985).
              The use of point notation highlights the association lines, and, as we
           shall see in §2.2.2, is useful for the purpose of comparing gestural
           organisations with feature geometry representations in which individual
           units lack any extent in time. For the remainder of this section, however,
           we will be concerned with showing the extent of temporal overlap of
           gestures, and therefore will employ the box notation form of the gestural
           score.
              The information represented in the gestural score serves to identify a
           particular lexical entry. The basic elements in such a lexical unit are the
           gestures, which, as we have already seen, can contrast with one another by
           means of differing descriptor values. In addition, gestural scores for

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           214 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           different lexical items can contrast in terms of the presence vs. absence of
           particular gestures (Browman & Goldstein 1986, in press; Goldstein &
           Browman 1986). Notice that one implication of taking gestures as basic
           units is that the resulting lexical representation is inherently under-
           specified, that is, it contains no specifications for irrelevant features.
           When a given articulator is not involved in any specified gesture, it is
           attracted to a 'neutral' position specific to that articulator (Saltzman et al.
           1988; Saltzman & Munhall in press).
              The fact that each gesture has an extent in time, and therefore can
           overlap with other gestures, has a variety of phonological and phonetic
           consequences. Overlap between invariantly specified gestures can auto-
           matically generate contextual variation of superficially different sorts: (1)
           acoustic non-invariance, such as the different formant transitions that
           result when an invariant consonant gesture overlaps different vowel
           gestures (Liberman & Mattingly 1985); (2) allophonic variation, such as
           the nasalised vowel that is produced by overlap between a syllable-final
           velic opening gesture and the vowel gesture (Krakow 1989); and (3)
           various kinds of 'coarticulation', such as the context-dependent vocal
           tract shapes for reduced schwa vowels that result from overlap by the
           neighbouring full vowels (Fowler 1981; Browman & Goldstein 1989).
           Here, however, we will focus on the implications of directly representing
           overlap among phonological units for the phonological/phonetic alter-
           nations in fluent speech.
              Browman & Goldstein (1987) have proposed that the wide variety of
           differences that have been observed between the canonical pronunciation
           of a word and its pronunciation in fluent contexts (e.g. Brown 1977;
           Shockey 1974) all result from two simple kinds of changes to the gestural
           score: (1) reduction in the magnitude of individual gestures (in both time
           and space) and (2) increase in overlap among gestures. That paper showed
           how these two very general processes might account for variations that
           have traditionally been described as segment deletions, insertions, as-
           similations and weakenings. The reason that increased overlap, in par-
           ticular, can account for such different types of alternations is that the
           articulatory and acoustic consequences of increased overlap will vary
           depending on the nature of the overlapping gestures. We will illustrate
           this using some of the examples of deletion and assimilation presented in
           Browman & Goldstein (1987), and then compare the gestural account with
           the treatment of such examples in non-linear phonological theories that do
           not directly represent overlap among phonological units.
              Let us examine what happens when a gestural score is varied by
           increasing the overlap between two oral constriction gestures, for example
           from no overlap to complete synchrony. This 'sliding' will produce
           different consequences in the articulatory and acoustic output of the
           model, depending on whether the gestures are on the same or different
           articulatory tiers, i.e. whether they employ the same or different tract
           variables. If the gestures are on different articulatory tiers, as in the case
           of a LIPS closure and a tongue tip (TT) closure, then the resulting tract
           variable motion for each gesture will be unaffected by the other concurrent
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory        gestures as phonological units   215
           gesture. Their tract variable goals will be met, regardless of the amount of
           overlap. However, with sufficient overlap, one gesture may completely
           obscure the other acoustically, rendering it inaudible. We refer to this as
           gestural 'hiding'. In contrast, when two gestures are on the same
           articulatory tier, for example, the tongue tip constriction gestures
           associated with / t / and / 6 / , they cannot overlap without perturbing each
           other's tract variable motions. The two gestures are in competition - they
           are attempting to do different tasks with the identical articulatory
           structures. In this case, the dynamical parameters for the two overlapping
           gestural control regimes are 'blended' (Saltzman et al. 1988; Saltzman &
           Munhall in press).
              Browman & Goldstein (1987) presented examples of articulations in
           fluent speech that showed the hiding and blending behaviour predicted by
           the model. Examples of hiding are transcribed in (5):
               (5) a. /p3rfakt'mem3rri/->-[p3rf3k'mem3rn]
                   b. /sevn 'plAs/H^[sevm'plAs]
           In (5a), careful listening to a speaker's production of perfect memory
           produced in a fluent sentence context failed to reveal any audible / t / at the
           end of perfect, although the / t / was audible when the two words were
           produced as separate phrases in a word list. This deletion of the final / t /
           is an example of a general (variable) process in English that deletes final
           / t / or / d / in clusters, particularly before initial obstruents (Guy 1980).
           However, the articulatory data for the speaker examined in Browman &
           Goldstein (1987) showed that nothing was actually deleted from a gestural
           viewpoint. The alveolar closure gesture at the end of 'perfect' was
           produced in the fluent context, with much the same magnitude as when
           the two words were produced in isolation, but it was completely over-
           lapped by the constrictions of the preceding velar closure and the
           following labial closure. Thus, the alveolar closure gesture was acoustically
           hidden. This increase in overlap is represented in Fig. 5, which shows the
           (partial) gestural scores posited for the two versions of this utterance,
           based on the observed articulatory movements. The gestures for the first
           syllable of memory (shown as shaded boxes) are well separated from the
           gestures for the last syllable of perfect (shown as unshaded boxes) in the
           word list version in Fig. 5a, but they slide earlier in time in the fluent
           version in Fig. 5b, producing substantial overlap among three closure
           gestures. Note that these three overlapping gestures are all on separate
           tiers.
                In (5b), seven plus shows an apparent assimilation, rather than deletion,
           and was produced when the phrase was produced at a fast rate. Assimi-
           lation of final alveolar stops and nasals to a following labial (or velar)
           stop is a common connected speech process in English (Gimson 1962;
           Brown 1977). Here again, however, the articulatory data in Browman &
           Goldstein (1987) showed that the actual change was 'hiding' due to
           increased overlap: the alveolar closure gesture at the end of seven was still
           produced by the speaker in the ' assimilated' version, but it was hidden by


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           216      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
                                                              'perfect memory'



                  TB
                                                       do
                                                      velar                                 -A
                                                            do
            (a) T T                                      alveolar



                                      crit                                       do                   do
                  LIPS               dental                                    liblal               labial




                                 t     f        9      k      t                m                    m ]


                                                       do                  wide
                                                      velar               palatal
                  TB
                                                            do
                                                         alveolar
            (W T T

                                      crit                      do                           do
                  LIPS               dental                   labial                       labial




                                 [     f                      m                            m ]
                                                     Figure 5
                   Partial gestural score for two versions of perfect memory, posited from
                   observed articulator movements. Last syllable of perfect shown in
                   unshaded boxes; first syllable of memory shown in shaded boxes. Only oral
                   tiers are shown, (a) Words spoken in word list; (b) words spoken as part
                   of fluent phrase.

           the preceding labial fricative and following labial stop. The changes in the
           posited gestural score can be seen in Fig. 6. Because the velum lowering
           gesture (VEL [wide]) at the end of seven in Fig. 6b overlaps the labial
           closure, the hiding is perceived as assimilation rather than deletion.
           Evidence for such hidden gestures (in some cases having reduced
           magnitude) has also been provided by a number of electropalatographic
           studies, where they have been taken as evidence of ' partial assimilation'
           (Barry 1985; Hardcastle & Roach 1979; Kohler 1976 (for German)).
           Thus, from a gestural point of view, deletion (5a) and assimilation (5b) of

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                      Articulatory gestures as phonological units         217
                                                                ' seven plus'


                                             wide
                   VEL


                    TB


                                                 do
            (a)    TT                         alveolar


                                         crit
                    LIPS                dental                     ' lioM


                                                                          whfc
                   GLO


                                    [    v                                        1             A   8 ]




                                           wide
                   VEL


                    TB                                           uvular


                                                 do      do*                       crit
            (b)    TT                         alveolar alveolar                  alveolar


                                         crit        do
                    LIPS                dental      labial


                                                         wide                      wide
                   GLO


                                                    m p 1                                   ]
                                                                  Figure 6
                   Partial gestural score for two versions of seven plus, posited from observed
                   articulator movements. Last syllable of seven shown in unshaded boxes;
                   plus shown in shaded boxes. The starred [alveolar clo] gesture indicates
                   that laterality is not represented in these scores, (a) Spoken at slow rate;
                   (b) spoken at fast rate.

           final alveolars may involve exactly the same process - increase of overlap
           resulting in a hidden gesture.
              When overlap is increased between two gestures on the same articu-
           latory tier, rather than on different articulatory tiers as in the above
           examples, the increased overlap results in blending between the dynamical

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
            218      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
                                                            'ten themes'




                  TB
                                              wide
                                             palatal                                       TtL '
                                     do                          do          crit                                 crlt
             (a) TT               alveolar                    alveolar      denial                              «l«0l*r



                  LIPS                                                                                 labial




                              [      t                                        e                        m




                                              wide
                  TB                         palatal                           (SO
                                     do                            cril                                 cril
                                  alveolar                        dent 1                             •lvTsdUr
             (b) T T


                  LIPS                                                                       do
                                                                                            labial



                              [      t                         n 6                           m
                                                   Figure 7
                   Hypothesised gestural score for two versions of ten themes, ten shown in
                   unshaded boxes; themes shown in shaded boxes. Only oral tiers are shown,
                   (a) Spoken with pause between words; (b) spoken as part of fluent phrase.


           parameters of the two gestures rather than hiding. The trajectories of the
           tract variables shared by the two gestures are affected by the differing
           amounts of overlap. Evidence for such blending can be seen in examples
           like (6):
               (6) /ten 9imz/ -*• [tEnGimz]
           The apparent assimilation in this case, as well as in many other cases that
           involve conflicting requirements for the same tract variables, has been

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        Articulatory gestures as phonological units z 19
           characterised by Catford (1977) as involving an accommodation between
           the two units. This kind of accommodation is exactly what is predicted by
           parameter blending, assuming that the same underlying mechanism of
           increased gestural overlap occurs here as in the examples in (5). The
           (partial) gestural scores hypothesised for (6), showing the increase in
           overlap, are displayed in Fig. 7. The hypothesis of gestural overlap, and
           consequent blending, makes a specific prediction: the observed motion of
           the T T tract variables resulting from overlap and blending should differ
           from the motion exhibited by either of the individual gestures alone. In
           particular, the location of the constriction should not be identical to that of
           either an alveolar or a dental, but rather should fall somewhere in between.
           If this prediction is confirmed, then three (superficially) different fluent
           speech processes — deletion of final alveolar stops in clusters, assimilation
           of final alveolar stops and nasals to following labials and velars, and
           assimilation of final alveolar stops to other tongue tip consonants - can all
           be accounted for as the consequence of increasing overlap between
           gestures in fluent speech.
              How does the gestural analysis of these fluent speech alternations
           compare with analyses proposed by other theories of non-linear pho-
           nology ? Assimilations such as those in (6) have been analysed by Clements
           (1985) as resulting from a rule that operates on sequences of alveolar stops
           or nasals followed by [4-coronal] consonants. The rule, whose effect is
           shown in (7), delinks the place node of the first segment and associates the
           place node of the second segment to the first (by spreading):

               (7) Manner tier                                      [ —cont]           [ + cons]

                       Supralaryngeal tier

                       Place tier                                   I + cor I              [ + cor]
                                                                    L-antJ
           Since the delinked features are assumed to be deleted, by convention, and
           not realised phonetically, the analysis in (7) predicts that the place of
           articulation of the assimilated sequence should be indistinguishable from
           that of the second consonant when produced alone. This claim differs
           from that made by the blending analysis, which predicts that the
           assimilated sequence should show the influence of both consonants. These
           conflicting predictions can be directly tested.
              The overlap analysis accounts for a wider range of phenomena than just
           the assimilation in (6). The deletion of final alveolars (in clusters) and the
           assimilation of final alveolars to following stops in (5) were also shown to
           be cases of hiding due to increased gestural overlap. Clements' analysis
           does not handle these additional cases, and cannot be extended to do so
           without major reinterpretation of autosegmental formalisms. To see that
           this is the case, suppose Clements' analysis is extended by eliminating the
           [ +coronal] requirement on the second segment (for fluent speech). This


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           220 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           would produce an assimilation for a case like (5b), but it would not be
           consistent with the data showing that the alveolar closure gesture is, in
           fact, still produced. To interpret a delinked gesture as one that is
           articulatorily produced, but auditorily hidden, would require a major
           change in the assumptions of the framework.
              Within the framework of Sagey (1986), the cases of hiding in (5) could
           be handled, but the analysis would fail to capture the parallelism between
           these cases and the blending case in (6). In Sagey's framework, there are
           separate class nodes for each of the independent oral articulators, cor-
           responding to the articulatory tiers. Thus, an assimilation like that in (5b)
           could be handled as in (8): the labial node of the second segment is spread
           to the preceding segment's place node, effectively creating a 'complex'
           segment involving two articulations:

                (8)           ROOT                                  ROOT

                                             [ — cont]                           cons]

                      Supralaryngeal                        Supralaryngeal


                             Place                                  Place


                           Coronal                                 Labial
           However, the example in (6) could not be handled in this way. In Sagey's
           framework, complex segments can only be created in case there are
           different articulator nodes, whereas in (6), the same articulator is involved.
           Thus, an analysis in Sagey's framework will not treat the examples in (5)
           and (6) as resulting from a single underlying process. If the specific
           prediction made by the overlap and blending analysis for cases like (6)
           proves correct, this would be evidence that a unitary process (overlap) is
           indeed involved - a unity that is directly captured in the overlapping
           gesture approach, but not in Sagey's framework.
              Finally we note that, in general, the gestural approach gives a more
           constrained and explanatory account of the casual speech changes. All
           changes are hypothesised to result from two simple mechanisms, which
           are intrinsically related to the talker's goals of speed and fluency - reduce
           the size of individual gestures, and increase their overlap. The detailed
           changes that emerge from these processes are epiphenomenal con-
           sequences of the 'blind' application of these principles, and they are
           explicitly generated as such by our model. Moreover, the gestural
           approach makes predictions about the kinds of fluent speech variation
           expected in other languages. Given differences between languages in the
           canonical gestural scores for lexical items (due to language-specific
           phasing principles), the same casual speech processes are predicted to have

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        Articulatory gestures as phonological units 221
           different consequences in different languages. For example, in a language
           such as Georgian in which stops in the canonical form are always released,
           word-finally and in clusters (Anderson 1974), the canonical gestural score
           should show less overlap between neighbouring stops than is the case in
           English. The gestural model predicts that overlap between gestures will
           increase in casual speech. But in a language such as Georgian, an increase
           of the same magnitude as in English would not be sufficient to cause
           hiding. Thus, no casual speech assimilations and deletions would be
           predicted for such a language, at least when the increase of gestural
           overlap is the same magnitude as for English.
              The usefulness of internal duration and overlap among phonological
           elements has begun to be recognised by phonologists (Sagey 1988;
           Hammond 1988). For example, Sagey (1986: 20-21) has argued that
           phonological association lines, which serve to link the features on separate
           tiers,' represent the relation of overlap in time... Thus... the elements that
           they link...must have internal duration'. However, in non-gestural
           phonologies, the consequences of such overlap cannot be evaluated
           without additional principles specifying how overlapping units interact.
           In contrast, in a gestural phonology, the nature of the interaction is
           implicit in the definition of the gestures themselves, as dynamical control
           regimes for a (model) physical system. Thus, one of the virtues of the
           gestural approach is that the consequences of overlap are tightly constrained
           and made explicit in terms of a physical model. Explicit predictions (e.g.
           about the relation between the constrictions formed by the tongue tip in
           themes and in ten themes, as well as about language differences) can be
           made that test hypotheses about phonological structures.
              In summary, a gestural phonology characterises the movements of the
           vocal tract articulators during speech in terms of a minimal set of discrete
           gestural units and patterns of spatiotemporal organisation among those
           units, using dynamic and articulatory models that make explicit the
           articulatory and acoustic consequences of a particular gestural organisation
           (i.e. gestural score). We have argued that a number of phonological
           properties of utterances are inherent in these explicit gestural con-
           stellations, and thus do not require postulation of additional phonological
           structure. Distinctiveness (Browman & Goldstein 1986, in press) and
           syllable structure (Browman & Goldstein 1988) can both be seen in
           gestural scores. In addition, a number of postlexical phonological alter-
           nations (Browman & Goldstein 1987) can be better described in terms
           of gestures and changes in their organisation (overlap) than in terms of
           other kinds of representations.

           2 Relation between gestural structures and feature
             geometry
           In the remainder of this paper, we look more closely at the relation
           between gestural structures and recent proposals of feature geometry. The
           comparison shows that there is much overall similarity and compatibility

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           222 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           between feature geometry and the geometry of phonological gestures
           (§2.1). Nevertheless, there are some differences. Most importantly, we
           show that the gesture is a cohesive unit, that is, a coordinated action of a
           set of articulators, moving to achieve a constriction that is specified with
           respect to its degree as well as its location. We argue that the gesture, and
           gestural scores, could usefully be incorporated into feature geometry
           (§2.2). The gestural treatment of constriction degree as part of a gestural
           unit leads, however, to an apparent disparity with how manner features
           are currently handled in feature geometry. We conclude, therefore (§3),
           by proposing a hierarchical TUBE GEOMETRY that resolves this apparent
           disparity, and that also, we argue, clarifies the nature of manner features
           and how they should be treated within feature geometry, or any phono-
           logical approach.


           2.1 Articulatory geometry and gestural descriptors
           In this section, the details of the gestural descriptor structures - the
           distinctive categories of the tract variable parameters - are laid out. Many
           aspects of these structures are rooted in long tradition. Jespersen (1914),
           for example, suggested an 'analphabetic' system of specifying articulatory
           place along the upper tract, the articulatory organ involved, and the degree
           of constriction. Pike (1943), in a more elaborated analphabetic system,
           included variables for impressionistic characterisation of the articulatory
           movements, including 'crests', 'troughs' and 'glides' (movements be-
           tween crests and troughs). More recently, various authors (e.g. Venneman
           & Ladefoged 1973; Campbell 1974; Halle 1982; Sagey 1986) have argued
           that phonological patterns are often formed on the basis of the moving
           articulator used (the articulator set, in the current system). The gestural
           structures described in this paper differ from these accounts primarily in
           the explicitness of the functional organisation of the articulators into
           articulatory gestures, and in the use of a dynamic model to characterise the
           coordinated movements among the articulators.
              The articulatory explicitness of the gestural approach leads to a clear-
           cut distinction between features of input and features of output. That is,
           a feature such as 'sonority' has very little to do with articulation, and a
           great deal to do with acoustics (Ladefoged 1988a, b). This difference can
           be captured by contrasting the input to the speech production mechanism
           - the individual gestures in the lexical entry - and the output - the ar-
           ticulatory, aerodynamic and acoustic consequences of combining several
           gestures in different parts of the vocal tract. The gestural descriptors,
           then, characterise the input mechanism - they are the ' features' of a
           purely articulatory phonology. Most traditional feature systems, however,
           represent a conflation of articulatory and acoustic properties. In order to
           avoid confusion with such combined feature systems, and in order to
           emphasise that gestural descriptors are purely articulatory, we retain the


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory gestures as phonological units 223

                                                                                              Gestures:
                                                                                     Articulator     Dimensions
                                                                                           Ssi


                                                                                                   [ 1CD
                                                                                                      CL
                                                                                                      stiffness

                                                                                                      CD
                                                                                                      CL
                                                                                                      CS
                                                                                                    _ stiffness

             Vocal                                                                                    CD
             Tract                                                                                    CL
                                                                                                      CS
                                                                                                    _ stiffness



                                                                                           VEL [|_CDstiffness
                                                                                                     ff       1_|

                                                                                                   [~CD


                                                                Figure 8
                                                                                             LO       CL
                                                                                                   l_ stiffness   1
                                                   Articulatory geometry tree.

           non-standard terminology developed in the computational model for the
           category names of the gestural descriptor values.
              In §2.1.1, we discuss the descriptors corresponding to the articulator
           sets and show how they are embedded in a hierarchical articulatory
           geometry, comparable to recent proposals of feature geometry. In
           §§2.1.2-5, we examine the other descriptors in turn, demonstrating that
           they can be used to define natural classes, and showing how the differences
           between these descriptors and other feature systems stem from their
           strictly articulatory and/or dynamic status.

           2.1.1 Anatomical hierarchy and articulator sets. The gestural descriptors
           listed in Fig. 2 are not hierarchically organised. That is, each descriptor
           occupies a separate dimension describing the movement of a gesture.
           However, there is an implicit hierarchy for the sets of articulators
           involved. This can be seen in Fig. 8, which redisplays (most of) the
           inventory of articulator sets and associated parameter dimensions from


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           224 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           Fig. 2, and adds a grouping of gestures into a hierarchy based on
           articulatory independence. Because the gestures characterise movements
           within the vocal tract, they are effectively organised by the anatomy of the
           vocal tract. T T and TB gestures share the individual articulators of
           tongue body and jaw, so they define a class of Tongue gestures. Similarly,
           both LIPS and Tongue gestures use the jaw, and are combined in the class
           of Oral gestures. Finally, Oral, velic (VEL), and glottal (GLO) constitute
           relatively independent subsystems that combine to form a description of
           the overall vocal tract. This anatomical hierarchy constitutes, in effect, an
           articulatory geometry.
              The importance of an articulatory geometry has repeatedly been noted,
           for example in the use of articulatory subsystems by Abercrombie (1967)
           and Anderson (1974). More recently, it has formed the basis of a number
           of proposals of feature geometry (Clements 1985; Sagey 1986; Ladefoged
           & Halle 1988; Ladefoged 1988a, b; McCarthy 1988). The hierarchy of
           the moving articulators is central to all these proposals of featural
           organisation, although the evidence discussed may be phonological pat-
           terns rather than physiological structure. Leaving aside manner features
           (to be discussed in §§2.2.1 and 3), the various hierarchies differ primarily
           in the inclusion of a Supralaryngeal node in the feature geometries of
           Clements (1985) and Sagey (1986), and a Tongue node in the articulatory
           geometry diagrammed in Fig. 8.
              There is no Supralaryngeal node included in the articulatory geometry
           of Fig. 8, because this geometry effectively organises the vocal tract input.
           As we will argue in §3, the Supralaryngeal node is important in
           characterising the output of the vocal tract. However, using the criterion
           of articulatory independence, we see no anatomical reason to combine any
           of the three major subsystems into a higher node in the input hierarchy.
           Rather than being part of a universal geometry, further combinations of
           the laryngeal, velic and Oral subsystems into class nodes such as
           Supralaryngeal, or Central (Oral) vs. Peripheral (velic and laryngeal),
           should be invoked where necessitated by language-particular organisation.
           For example, the central-peripheral distinction was argued to exist for
           Toba Batak (Hayes 1986).
              The Tongue node in Fig. 8 is proposed on anatomical grounds, again
           using the criterion of articulatory independence (and relatedness). That is,
           the T T articulator set shares two articulators with the TB articulator set
           - the tongue body and the jaw. Put another way, the tongue is an integral
           structure that is clearly separate from the lips. There is some evidence for
           this node in phonological patterns as well. A number of articulations made
           with the tongue cannot be clearly categorised as being made with either
           T T or TB. For example, laterals in Kuman (Papua New Guinea) alternate
           between velars and coronals (Lynch 1983, cited in McCarthy 1988).
           They are always Tongue articulations, but are not categorisable as
           exclusively T T or TB. Rather, they require some reference to both
           articulator sets. This is also the case for English laterals, which can


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                      Articulatory gestures as phonological units 225
           alternate between syllable-initial coronals and syllable-final velars (Lade-
           foged 1982).
              Palatal and palato-alveolar consonants are another type of articulation
           that falls between T T and TB articulations (Ladefoged & Maddieson
           1986; Keating 1988; Recasens in preparation). Keating (1988) suggests
           that the intermediate status of palatals — partly T T and partly TB - can be
           handled by treating palatal consonants as complex segments, represented
           under both the tongue body and tongue tip/blade nodes. However,
           without the higher level Tongue node, such a representation equates
           complex segments such as labio-velars, consisting of articulations of two
           separate articulators (lips and tongue), with palatals, arguably a single
           articulation of a single predorsal region of the tongue (Recasens in
           preparation). With the inclusion of the Tongue node, labio-velars and
           palatals would be similar in being double Oral articulations, but different
           in being LIPS plus Tongue articulations vs. two Tongue articulations.
           Thus, the closeness of the articulations is reflected in the level of the
           nodes.
              This evidence is suggestive, but not conclusive, on the role of the
           Tongue node in phonological patterns. We predict that more evidence of
           phonological patterns based on the anatomical interdependence of the
           parts of the tongue should exist. One type of evidence should result
           from the fact that one portion of the tongue cannot move completely
           independently of the other portions. This lack of independence can be
           seen, for example, in the suggestion that the tongue body may have a
           characteristically more backed shape for consonants using the tip/blade in
           dentals as opposed to alveolars (Ladefoged & Maddieson 1986; Stevens
           et al. 1986). We would expect to find blocking rules based on such
           considerations.

           2.1.2 Constriction degree (CD). CD is the analogue within the gestural
           approach of the manner feature(s). However, it is crucial to note that,
           unlike the manner classes in feature geometry, CD is first and foremost an
           attribute of the gesture - the constriction made by the moving set of
           articulators - and therefore, at the gestural level, is solely an articulatory
           characterisation. (This point will be elaborated in §2.2.1.) In our model,
           CD is a continuum divided into the following discrete ranges: [closed],
           [critical], [narrow], [mid] and [wide] (Ladefoged 1988b refers to such a
           partitioning of a continuum as an 'ordered set' of values). The two most
           closed categories correspond approximately to acoustic stops and fric-
           atives; the names used for these categories indicate that these values are
           articulatory rather than acoustic. Thus, the second degree of constriction,
           labelled [critical], indicates that critical degree of constriction for a gesture
           at which some particular aerodynamic consequences could obtain if there
           were appropriate air flow and muscular tension. That is, the critical
           constriction value permits frication (turbulence) or voicing, depending on
           the set of articulators involved (oral or laryngeal). Similarly, [closed]


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           226 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           refers to a tight articulatory closure for that particular gesture; the overall
           state of the vocal tract might cause this closure to be, acoustically, either
           a stop or a sonorant. This, in turn, will be determined by the combined
           effects of the concurrently active gestures. §3 will discuss in greater detail
           how we account for natural classes that depend on the consequences of
           combining gestures.
              The categorical distinctions among [closed], [critical] and the wider
           values (as a group) are clearly based on quantal articulatory-acoustic
           relations (Stevens 1972). The basis for the distinction among wider values
           is not as easy to find in articulatory-acoustic relations, although [narrow]
           might be identified with Catford's (1977) [approximant] category. Catford
           is also careful to define 'articulatory stricture' in solely articulatory terms.
           He defines [approximant] as -a constriction just wide enough to yield
           turbulent flow under high airflow conditions such as in open glottis for
           voicelessness, but laminar flow under low airflow conditions such as in
           voicing. The other descriptors are required to distinguish among vowels.
           For example, contrasts among front vowels differing in height are
           represented as [palatal] constriction locations (cf. Wood 1982) with
           [narrow], [mid] or [wide] CDs, where these categories might be es-
           tablished on the basis of sufficient perceptual and articulatory contrast in
           the vowel system (Lindblom 1986; Lindblom et al. 1983). If additional
           differentiation is required, values are combined to indicate intermediate
           values (e.g. [narrow mid]). In addition, [wide] vs. [narrow] can be used to
           distinguish the size of glottal aperture - the CD for GLO - associated
           with aspirated and unaspirated stops, respectively.

           2.1.3 Constriction location (CL). Unlike CD, which differs from its featural
           analogue of manner by being articulatory rather than acoustic, both CL
           and its featural analogue of place are articulatory in definition. However,
           CL differs from place features in not being hierarchically related to the
           articulator set. That is, the set of articulators moving to make a con-
           striction, and the location of that constriction, are two independent (albeit
           highly related) dimensions of a gesture. Thus, we use the label 'Oral'
           rather than 'place' in the articulatory hierarchy, not only to emphasise the
           anatomical nature of the hierarchy, but also to avoid the conflation of
           moving articulator and location along the tract that 'place' conveys.
              The constriction location refers to the location on the upper or back wall
           of the vocal tract where a gestural constriction occurs, and thus is separate
           from, but constrained by, the articulator set moving to make the
           constriction. Fig. 9 expands the articulator sets, the CL descriptor values
           and the possible relations between them: the locations where a given set
           of articulators can form a constriction. Notice that each articulator set
           maps onto a subset of the possible constriction locations (rather than all
           possible CLs), where the subset is determined by anatomical possibility.
           Notice also that there is a non-unique mapping between articulator sets
           and CL values. For example, both T T and TB can form a constriction at


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory gestures as phonological units   227


                        r
                         Articulator
                           ticuli                    Constriction Locations


                         LIPS


                                                               dental



                          TT




                                                               velar
                            TB
                                                               uvular


                          TR*                                  pharyngeal




                                                  Figure 9
                     Possible mappings between articulator sets and constriction locations.


           the hard palate; indeed, it may be possible for TB to form a constriction
           even further forward in the mouth. Thus constriction location cannot be
           subsumed under the moving articulator hierarchy, contrary to the pro-
           posals by Ladefoged (1988a) and Sagey (1986), among others.
              This can be seen most clearly in the case of the [labial] and [dental]
           locations, where either the LIPS or T T articulator sets can form
           constrictions, as shown in (9) (the unusual linguo-labials are discussed in
           Maddieson 1987). (A similar matrix is presented in Ladefoged & Mad-
           dieson 1986, but not as part of a formal representation.) That is, the
           [labial] constriction location cannot be associated exclusively with the
           LIPS articulator set. Similarly, the [dental] constriction location cannot
           be associated exclusively with the T T articulator set. Thus, we view CL
           as an independent cross-classifying descriptor dimension whose values


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           228 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           cannot be hierarchically subsumed uniquely under particular articulator
           sets:
               (9)                                     Articulator set
                                                     LIPS            TT

                              labial               bilabial            linguo-labial
                      CL
                              dental            labio-dental               dental
              We use multivalued (rather than binary-valued) CL descriptors, fol-
           lowing Ladefoged (1988b), since the CL descriptor values correspond to
           categorical ranges of the continuous dynamic parameters. In the front of
           the mouth, the basis for the discrete ranges of CL presumably involves the
           actual differentiated anatomical landmarks, so that parameter values are
           tuned with respect to them. There may, in addition, be relatively
           invariant auditory properties associated with the different locations
           (Stevens 1989). For the categories that are further back (palatal and
           beyond), Wood (1982) hypothesises that the distinct CLs emerge from the
           alignment of Stevens' quantal considerations with the positioning possi-
           bilities allowed by the tongue musculature. To the extent that this set of
           descriptor values is too limited, it can, again, be extended by combining
           descriptors, e.g. [palatal velar], or by using 'retracted' and 'advanced'
           (Principles of the IPA 1949).

           2.1.4 Constriction shape (CS). In some cases, gestures involving the same
           articulator sets and the same values of CL and CD may differ in the shape
           of the constriction, as looked at in the frontal, rather than sagittal, plane.
           For example, constrictions involving T T gestures may differ as to whether
           they are formed with the actual tip or blade of the tongue, the shape of the
           constriction being ' wider' in the third dimension if produced with the
           blade. The importance of this difference has been built into recent feature
           systems as apical vs. laminal (Ladefoged 1988a) or [distributed] (Sagey
           1986). Some method for controlling such differences needs to be built into
           our computational model. An additional T T tract variable (TTR) that
           specifies the orientation (angle) of the tongue tip in the sagittal plane with
           respect to the CL and CD axes is currently being incorporated into the
           task dynamic model. It is possible that different settings of this variable
           will be able to produce the required apical/laminal differences, as well as
           allowing the sublaminal contact involved in extreme retroflex stops
           (Catford 1977; Ladefoged & Maddieson 1986).
              For TB gestures, an additional tract variable is also required to control
           cross-sectional shape. One of the relevant shape differences involves the
           production of laterals, in which at least one of the sides of the tongue does
           not make firm contact with the molars. Ladefoged (1980) suggests that the
           articulatory manoeuvre involved is a narrowing of the tongue volume, so
           that it is pulled away from the sides of the mouth. Such narrowing is an
           attractive option for an additional TB shaping tract variable. In this

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                       Articulatory gestures as phonological units 229
           proposal, an alveolar lateral would essentially involve two gestures: a T T
           closure, and a TB gesture with a [narrowed] value for CS and perhaps
           defaults for CL and CD. (Some further specification of TBCD would
           clearly be required for lateral fricatives, as opposed to lateral approxi-
           mants.) In this sense, laterals would be complex constellations of
           gestures, as suggested by Ladefoged & Maddieson (1986), and similar to
           the proposal of Keating (1988) for treating palatals as complex segments.
           Another role for a TB shaping tract variable might involve bunching for
           rhotics (Ladefoged 1980). Finally, it is unclear whether an additional
           shape parameter is required for LIPS gestures. It might be required to
           describe differences between the two kinds of rounding observed in
           Swedish (e.g. Lindau 1978; Linker 1982). On the other hand, given
           proper constraints on lip shape (Abry & Boe 1986), it may be possible to
           produce all the required lip shapes with just LA and LP.

           2.1.5 Dynamic descriptors. The STIFFNESS (k) of a gesture is a dynamical
           parameter, inferred from articulatory motions, that has been shown to
           vary as a function of gestural CD, stress and speaking rate (Browman &
           Goldstein 1985; Kelso et al. 1985; Ostry & Munhall 1985). In addition,
           however, we hypothesise that stiffness may be tuned independently, so
           that it can serve as the primary distinction between two gestures, / j / and
           /w/ are two cases in which gestural stiffness as an additional independent
           parameter may be specified, / j / is a TB [narrow palatal] gesture and / w /
           is a complex formed by a TB [narrow velar] gesture and a LIPS [narrow
           protruded] gesture. Our current hypothesis is that these gestures have the
           same CD and CL as for the corresponding vowels (/i/ and /u/), but that
           they differ in having an [increased] value of stiffness. This is similar to the
           articulatory description of glides in Catford (1977). Finally, it is possible
           that the stiffness value that governs the rate of movement into a
           constriction is related to the actual biomechanical stiffness of the tissues
           involved. If so, it would be relevant to those gestures that, in fact, require
           a specific muscular stiffness: trills and taps likely involve characteristic
           values of oral gesture stiffness, and pitch control and certain phonation
           types require specified vocal fold stiffnesses (Halle & Stevens 1971;
           Ladefoged 1988a).

           2.2 The representation of phonological units
           In §2.1 we laid out the details of gestural descriptors and how they are
           organised by an articulatory geometry. Setting aside for the moment the
           critical aspects of gestures discussed in §1.3 (internal duration and
           overlap), the differences between feature geometry and the organisation of
           gestural descriptors have so far been comparatively minor - primarily the
           proposed Tongue node and the non-hierarchical relation between con-
           striction location and the moving articulators. In this section, we consider
           two ways in which a gestural analysis suggests a different organisation of
           phonological structure from that proposed by the feature geometries

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           230 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           referred to in §2.1.1. First, we present evidence that gestures function as
           cohesive units of phonological structure (§2.2.1). Second, we discuss the
           advantages of the gestural score as a phonological notation (§2.2.2).

           2.2.1 The gesture as a unit in phonological patterns. In Fig. 8, gestures are
           in effect the terminal nodes of a feature tree. Notice that the constriction
           degree, as well as constriction location, constriction shape and stiffness, is
           part of the descriptor bundle. That is, constriction degree is specified
           directly at the articulator node - it is one dimension of gestural movement.
           Looked at in terms of the gestural score (e.g. Fig. 3), successive units on
           a given oral tier contain specifications for both constriction location and
           degree of that articulator set. This positioning of CD differs from that
           proposed in current feature geometries. While CL and CS (or their
           analogues) are typically considered to be dependents of the articulator
           nodes, CD (or its analogues) is not. Rather, some of the closest analogues
           to CD - [stricture], [continuant] and [sonorant] - are usually associated
           with higher levels, either the Supralaryngeal node (Clements 1985) or the
           Root node (Sagey 1986; Ladefoged & Halle 1988; Ladefoged 1988a, b;
           McCarthy 1988). Is there any evidence, then, that the unit of the
           gesture plays a role in phonological organisation ? Within the approach of
           feature geometry, such evidence would consist, for example, of rules in
           which an articulator set and the degree and location of the constriction it
           forms either spread or delete together, as a unitary whole.
              It is in fact generally assumed, implicitly although not explicitly, that
           velic and glottal features have this type of unitary gestural organisation.
           That is, features such as [ +nasal] and [ — voice] combine the constriction
           degree (wide) along with the articulator set (velum or glottis). Assuming
           a default specification of these features ([ — nasal] and [ + voice]), then
           denasalisation consists of the deletion of a nasal gesture, and intervocalic
           voicing of the deletion of a laryngeal gesture. Additional implicit use of a
           gestural unit can be found in Sagey's (1986) proposal that [round] be
           subordinate to the Labial node. This is exactly the organisation that a
           gestural analysis suggests, since [round] is effectively a specification of the
           degree and nature of the constriction of the lips.
              It is in the case of primary oral gestures that proposals positioning CD
           at the gestural level and those positioning it at higher levels contrast most
           sharply. The inherent connection among all the component aspects of
           making a constriction, or in other words, the unitary nature of the gesture,
           can be seen most clearly when oral gestures are deleted, a phenomenon
           sometimes described as delinking of the Place (or Supralaryngeal) node -
           debuccalisation. In a gestural analysis, when the movement of an ar-
           ticulator to make a constriction is deleted, everything about that con-
           striction is deleted, including the constriction degree.
              For example, Thrainsson (1978, cited in Clements & Keyser 1983)
           demonstrates that, in Icelandic, the productive phenomenon whereby the
           first of a sequence of two identical voiceless aspirated stops is replaced by
           [h] consists of deleting the first set of supralaryngeal features. This set of

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory gestures as phonological units    231




                                                                                   'palm' [pam]
                                                             Figure 10
                   Gestural score for palm [pam] in point notation, with articulatory
                   geometry.

           supralaryngeal features corresponds to the unit of an oral gesture; it
           includes the constriction degree, whether described as [clo], [stop] or
           [ — continuant]. Thus, in this example, the entire oral gesture is deleted.
              Another example is cited in McCarthy (1988), using data from
           Straight (1976) and Lombardi (1987). In homorganic stop clusters and
           affricates (with an intervening word boundary) in Yucatec Maya, the oral
           portion of the initial stop is deleted - for example, /k#k/ -> /h#k/ and
           (affricate) /ts#t/->/s#t/. Again in this case the constriction degree is
           deleted along with the place, supporting a gestural analysis: the entire oral
           closure gesture is deleted. Note that McCarthy effectively supports this
           analysis, in spite of his positing [continuant] as dependent on the Root
           node, when he says 'a stop becomes a segment with no value for
           [continuant], which is incompatible with supraglottal articulation'.
              Thus, there is some clear evidence in phonological patterning for the
           association of CD with the articulator node. This aspect of gestural
           organisation is totally compatible with the basic approach of feature
           geometry, requiring only that CD be linked to the articulator node rather
           than to a higher level node. In §3, we will show how this gestural affiliation
           of CD is also compatible with phonological examples in which CD is
           seemingly separable from the gesture - where it is ' left behind' when a
           particular articulator-CL combination is deleted, or where it appears not
           to spread along with the articulatory set and CL. For now, we turn to a
           second aspect of the gestural approach that could usefully be incorporated
           into feature geometry, this one involving the use of the gestural score
           as a two-dimensional projection of the inherently three-dimensional
           phonological representation.

           2.2.2 Gestural scores, articulatory geometry, and phonological units. The
           gestural score, in particular the 'point' form in Fig. 4, is topologically
           similar to a non-linear phonological representation. When combined with

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           232 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein


                                                                                       1Lir!>           Llaljialj
                  (a)                        T                                (b)
                                       /           \
                        VEL       [wide]           [do]                                ™                 [vi]


                                           root                                                         root
                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                      1
                                           supra                                                    supra
                  (c)                                                         (o)                       place
                                         soft pal
                                                                                                    /     \
                                      /              \                                             /              \
                                  [+nasal]         [-nasal]                                     dorsal          labial




                               prenasalized stop [mB]                                       labiovelar stop [flB]
                                   Contour segment                                          Complex segment



                                                    Figure n
                   Comparison of gestural score and feature geometry representations for
                   contour and complex segments, (a) Gestural^score for contour segment
                   [mb]; (b) gestural score for complex segment [gb]; (c) feature geometryfor
                   contour segment [mb]; (d) feature geometry for complex segment [gb].


           the hierarchical articulatory geometry, the gestural score captures several
           relevant dimensions of a non-linear representation simultaneously, in a
           clear and revealing fashion. Fig. io shows a gestural score for palm, using
           point notation and association lines, combined with the articulatory
           geometry on the left. Note that the geometry tree is represented on its side,
           rather than the more usual up-down orientation. This seemingly trivial
           point in fact is a very useful consequence of using gestural scores as
           phonological notation, as we shall see. It permits spatial organisation such
           as the articulatory geometry, which is represented on the vertical axis, to
           be separated from temporal information including sequencing of phono-
           logical units, which is represented on the horizontal axis. Such a
           separation is particularly useful in those instances in which the gestures in
           a phonological unit are not simultaneous.
              For example, prenasalised stops are single phonological units consisting
           of a sequence of nasal specifications. Fig. i ia depicts a gestural score for
           prenasalised [mb], which contains a closure gesture on the LIPS tier
           associated with a sequence of two gestures on the VEL tier, one with

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                       Articulatory gestures as phonological units 233
           CD = [wide] followed by one with CD = [clo]. Double articulations also
           constitute a single phonological unit. Fig. 1 ib displays a gestural score for
           [gb], which consists of a [clo labial] gesture on the LIPS tier associated
           with a [clo velar] gesture on the TB tier. Sagey (1986) terms the first type
           of unit a contour segment, and the second type a complex segment, a
           terminology that is an apt description of the two figures.
              Compare the representations in Figs, n a and 11b with those in Figs,
           lie and 1 id, which are Sagey's (1986) feature geometry specifications of
           the same two phonological units. In the feature geometry representation,
           the two types of segment appear to be equally sequential, or equally non-
           sequential. This is a consequence - an unfortunate consequence - of
           conflating two uses of branching notation, that of indicating (order-free)
           hierarchical information and that of indicating sequencing information.
           Thus in Fig. n d (on the right), the branching lines represent order-free
           branching in a hierarchical tree. In Fig. 1 ic, however, the branching lines
           represent the associations between two ordered elements and a single node
           on another tier. This conflation results from the particular choice of how
           to project an inherently three-dimensional phonological structure (feature
           hierarchy x phonological unit constituency x time) on to two dimensions.
              In the gestural score, the two-dimensional projection avoids this
           conflation of the two uses of branching notation. Here nodes always
           represent gestures and lines are always association (or phasing) lines. Thus
           any branching, as in Fig. 1 ia, always indicates temporal information about
           sequencing. The hierarchical information about the articulatory geometry
           is present in the organisation of the articulatory tiers, and is thus
           represented (once) by a sideways tree all the way at the left of the gestural
           score (as in Fig. 10). In this way, the gestural score retains the virtues of
           earlier forms of phonological notation in which sequencing information
           was clearly distinguishable, while also providing the benefits of the spatial
           geometry that organises the tiers hierarchically. It would, of course, be
           possible to adopt this kind of representation within feature geometry.
              Finally, the reader may have observed that, in discussions to now,
           constituency in phonological units has been indicated solely by using
           association lines between gestures. In particular, there has been no separate
           representation of prosodic phonological structure. This is not an inherent
           aspect of a phonology of articulatory gestures; rather, it is the result of our
           current research strategy, which is to see how much structure inheres
           directly in the relations among gestures, without recourse to higher-level
           nodes. However, once again, it is possible to integrate the gestural score
           with other types of phonological representation. To exemplify how the
           gestural score can be integrated with explicit phonological structure, Fig.
           12 displays a mapping between the gestural score for palm and a simplified
           version of the prosodic structure of Selkirk (1988), with the articulatory
           geometry indicated on the left.
              In short, although gestures and gestural scores originated in a de-
           scription of articulator movement patterns, they nevertheless provide
           constructs that are useful for phonological representation. Gestures

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           234 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
                                                                                       Syl
                                                Syllable Tier




                                                Mora tier


                                                Root Tier        •

                                                                                                  / |

                                                                                                  /[wide]
                                                 VEL
                                                                     \




                                                                                                  Li
                                                                                  \   narrow  |
                                                                                  Ipharyngeal 1

                                                             r °ili]
                                                                           •
                                                                         [wide]



                                                                                  'palm' [pam]
                                                              Figure 12
                    Gestural score for palm [pam] in point notation, mapped on to prosodic
                    structure, with articulatory hierarchy on left.


           constitute an organisation (combining a moving articulator set with the
           degree and location of the constriction formed) that can act as a
           phonological unit. Gestural scores provide a useful notation for non-linear
           phonological representations, one that permits phonological constituency
           to be expressed in the same representation with 'phonetic' order in-
           formation, which is indicated by the relative positions of the gestures in
           the temporal matrix. The gestures can be grouped into higher-level units,
           using either association lines or a mapping on to prosodic structure,
           regardless of the simultaneity, sequentiality or partial overlap of the
           gestures. In addition, the articulatory geometry organising the tiers can be
           expressed in the same representation.


           3 Tube geometry and constriction degree hierarchy
           So far, we have been treating individual gestures as the terminal nodes of
           an anatomical hierarchy. From this perspective, articulatory geometry
           serves as a way of creating natural classes of gestures on anatomical
           grounds. In this section, we turn to the vocal tract as a whole, and consider
           how additional natural classes emerge from the combined effect (articu-

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                     Articulatory gestures as phonological units 235
           latory, aerodynamic and acoustic consequences) of a set of concurrent
           gestures. We argue that these natural classes can best be characterised
           using a hierarchy for constriction degree within the vocal tract based on
           TUBE GEOMETRY.
              Rather than viewing the vocal tract as a set of articulators, organised by
           the anatomy, tube geometry views it as a set of tubes, connected either in
           series or in parallel. The sets of articulators move within these tubes,
           creating constrictions. In other words, articulatory gestures occur within
           the individual tubes. More than one gesture may be simultaneously active;
           together, these gestures interact to determine the overall aerodynamic and
           acoustic output of the entire linked set of tubes. Similarities in the tube
           consequences of a set of different gestures may lead to similar phonological
           behaviour: this is the source of acoustic features (Ladefoged 1988a) such
           as [grave] and [flat] (Jakobson et al. 1969) that organise different gestures
           (in our terms) according to standing wave nodes in the oral tube (Ohala
           & Lorentz 1977; Ohala 1985).
              Within this tube perspective, there is a vocal tract hierarchy that
           characterises an instantaneous time slice of the output of the vocal tract.
           Such a hierarchy may appear identical to the feature geometry of Sagey
           (1986). There are, however, two crucial differences. Unlike Sagey's root
           node, which 'corresponds neither to anatomy of the vocal tract nor to
           acoustic properties' (1986: 16), the highest node in the vocal tract
           hierarchy characterises the physical state of the vocal tract at a single
           instant in time. In addition, tube geometry characterises manner - CD -
           at more than just the highest level node. CD is characterised at each level
           of the hierarchy. Thus, each of the tubes and sets of compound tubes in
           the hierarchy will have its own effective constriction degree that is
           completely predictable from the CD of its constituents, and hence
           ultimately from the CD of the currently active gestures. At the vocal tract
           level, the effective CD of the supralaryngeal tract, taken together with the
           initiator power provided by the lungs, determines the nature of the actual
           airflow through the vocal tract: none (complete occlusion), turbulent flow
           or laminar flow. This vocal tract hierarchy thus serves as the basis for a
           hierarchy for CD.
              The important point here for phonology is that, in the output system,
           CD exists simultaneously at all the nodes in the vocal tract hierarchy - it
           is not isolable to any single node, but rather forms its own CD hierarchy.
           As we argue in §3.2, all levels of the hierarchy are potentially important
           in accounting for phonological regularities, and may form the basis of a
           natural class. First, however, in §3.1, we expand on the nature of tube
           geometry.

           3.1 How tube geometry works
           Fig. 13 provides a pictorial representation of the tubes that constitute the
           vocal tract, embedded in the space denned by the anatomical hierarchy of
           articulatory geometry, in the vertical dimension, and by the constriction
               10                                                                          PHO 6
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           236      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein




                                                                     GLO Nasal      Lateral    Central   LIPS
                                                                           I          I         ^ ^
                                                                         VEL         TB       TB TT




                                                      GLO

                                                             Figure 13
                               Vocal tract hierarchy: articulatory and tube geometry.

           degree hierarchy of tube geometry, in the horizontal dimension. The
           constriction action of individual gestures is schematically represented by
           the small grey disks. Thus, the two dimensions in the figure serve to
           organise the gestures occurring in the vocal tract tubes, vertically in terms
           of articulatory geometry, and horizontally in terms of tube geometry.
           Looking at the tube structure in the centre, we can see that the vocal tract
           branches into three distinct tubes or airflow channels: a Nasal tube, a
           Central tongue channel and a Lateral tongue channel. The complex is
           terminated by GLO gestures at one end. At the other end, the Central and
           Lateral channels are together terminated by LIPS gestures.
              The tube geometry tree, shown at the top of the figure, reflects the
           combinations of the tubes and their terminators. The tube level of the tree
           has five nodes, one for each of the three basic tubes and the two
           terminators. Within each of these basic tubes, the CD will be determined
           by the CD of the gestures acting within that tube, which are shown as
           subordinates to the tube nodes. For example, the CD of T T gestures will
           contribute to determining the CD of the Central tube. TB gestures will
           contribute to the Central and/or Lateral tube, depending on the con-
           striction shape of the TB gesture. Each of the superordinate nodes
           corresponds to a tube junction, forming a compound tube from simpler
           tubes and/or the termination of a tube. Thus, the Central and Lateral

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    Articulatory       gestures as phonological units   237
           tubes together form a compound tube labelled the Tongue tube. The
           compound Tongue tube is terminated by the LIPS configuration, which
           combines with the Tongue tube to form an Oral tube. The Oral and Nasal
           tubes form another compound tube, the Supralaryngeal, which is ter-
           minated by GLO gestures to form the overall Vocal Tract compound
           tube.
              The effective CD at each superordinate node can be predicted from the
           CD of the tubes being joined and the way they are joined. When tubes are
           joined in parallel, the effective CD of the compound tube has the CD of
           the widest component tube, that is, the maximum CD. When they are
           joined in series, the compound tube has the CD of the narrowest
           component tube, that is, the minimum CD. Terminations and multiple
           constrictions within the same tube work like tubes connected in series.
           Using these principles, it is possible to 'percolate' CD values from the
           values for individual gestures up to the various nodes in the hierarchy.
           Table I shows the possible values for CD of individual gestures, and
           Table II shows how to determine the CD values at each successive node
           up through the Supralaryngeal node, referred to hereafter as the Supra
           node (the Vocal Tract node will be discussed below).

                                 a. LIPS          CD]                     = clo cnt open
                                 b. T T           CD]                     = clo crit open
                                 c. TB            CD, CS = normal]        = clo crit open
                                 d. TB            CD, CS = narrowed]      = clo crit open
                                 e. VEL           CD]                     = clo      open
                                 f. GLO           CD]                     = clo crit open
                                          GLO [crit] is value appropriate for Voicing
           [Table I. Possible constriction degree (CD) values at gestural tract variable
                            level: open — — (narrow OR mid OR wide)]

                            a. Nasal         [CD] = VEL [CD]
                               Lateral       [CD] = TB [CD, CS = narrowed]
                               Central       [CD] = MIN (TT [CD], TB [CD, CS = normal])
                            b. Tongue        [CD] = MAX (Central [CD], Lateral [CD])
                            c. Oral          [CD] = MIN (Tongue [CD], LIPS [CD])
                            d. Supra         [CD] = MAX (Oral [CD], Nasal [CD])
                    [Table II. Percolation of CD up through Supralaryngeal node]

              The percolation principles follow from aerodynamic considerations.
           Basically, airflow through a tube system will follow the path of least
           resistance, as we can illustrate with examples of nasals and laterals. The
           Oral and Nasal tubes are connected in parallel, forming a compound
           Supralaryngeal tube. If the Oral tube is [closed] but the Nasal tube is
           [open], Table lid indicates that the CD of the combined Supra tube will
           be the wider of the two openings, i.e. [open], as it is in a nasal stop. To take
           a less obvious example, consider the case where the Nasal tube is [open],
           but the Oral tube is [crit], i.e. appropriate for turbulence generation under
           the appropriate airflow conditions. Table lid predicts that in this case as
           well the Supra CD is [open], implying that there will be no turbulence

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           238 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           generated. This in turn predicts that nasalised fricatives, which consist of
           exactly the VEL [open] and Oral [crit] gestures, should not exist. That is,
           given that, at normal airflow rates, the air in this configuration will tend
           to follow the path of least resistance through the [open] nasal passage,
           nasalised fricatives would require abnormal degrees of total airflow in
           order to generate airflow through the [crit] constriction that is sufficient to
           produce turbulence.
              Ohala (1975) has proposed that such nasalised fricatives are, indeed,
           rare, precisely because they are hard to produce. As Ladefoged &
           Maddieson (1986) argue, this could account for alternations in which the
           nasalised counterparts of voiced fricatives are voiced approximants, such
           as in Guarani (Gregores & Suarez 1967). However, they also present
           evidence from Schadeberg (1982) for a nasalised labio-dental fricative in
           Umbundu. This suggests that the percolation principles may be over-
           ridden in certain special cases, perhaps by increased airflow settings.
              At the highest level, that of the Vocal Tract, the glottal (GLO) CD and
           stiffness and the Supra CD combine with initiator (pulmonic) action to
           determine the actual aerodynamic and acoustic characteristics of airflow
           through the vocal tract. At this point, then, it becomes more appropriate
           to label the states of the Vocal Tract in terms of the characteristics of this
           'output' airflow, rather than in terms of the CD, which is one of its
           determining parameters. A gross, but linguistically relevant, charac-
           terisation of the output distinguishes the three states defined in Table
           Ilia: occlusion, noise and resonance. Assuming some 'average' value for
           initiator power, Table Illb shows how GLO and Supra CD jointly
           determine these properties. A complete closure of either system results in
           occlusion. If GLO is [crit] (appropriate position for voicing, assuming also
           appropriate stiffness), then it combines with an open Supralaryngeal tract
           to product resonance. Any other condition produces noise. In some cases,
           e.g. GLO [open] and Supra [open], this is weak noise generated at the
           glottis (aspiration). In other cases, e.g. Supra [crit], the noise is generated
           in the Oral tube (frication). Further details of the output, such as where
           the turbulence is generated, and whether voicing accompanies occlusion
           or noise, are beyond our scope here. Ohala (1983) gives many examples of
           how the principles involved are relevant to aspects of phonological
           patterning.
                            a. VT outputs
                               occlusion:       no airflow through VT; silence or low-amplitude
                                                voicing
                               noise:           turbulent airflow
                               resonance:       laminar airflow with voicing; formant structure
                            b. VT [CD]           = occlusion / Supra [clo] OR GLO [clo]
                                                 = resonance / Supra [open] AND GLO [crit]
                                                 = noise       / otherwise
                          [Table III. Acoustic consequences at Vocal Tract level]

             Finally, note that the percolation of CD through levels of the tube
           geometry can be defined at any instant in time, and depends on the actual

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                      Articulatory gestures as phonological units 239
           size of the constriction within each tube at that point in time, regardless
           of whether some gesture is actively producing the constriction. Thus, the
           instantaneous CD is the output consequence of the default values for
           articulators not under active control, the history of the articulator
           movements, and the constellation of gestures currently active. Table IV
           shows the default value we are assuming for each basic tube and
           terminator. (The default for Lateral is seriously oversimplified, and does
           not give the right Lateral CD in the case of Central fricatives, although
           percolation to the Oral level will work correctly.)

                                         Nasal       [CD] = clo
                                         Lateral     [CD] = Central [CD]
                                         Central     [CD] = open
                                         LIPS        [CD] = open
                                         GLO         [CD] = crit
                          Default values are determined by the effect of the model articulators'
                                           neutral configurations within a tube

                     [Table IV. Default CD values for basic tubes and terminators]


           3.2 The constriction degree hierarchy
           The importance of tube geometry for phonology resides in the fact that
           constriction degree is not isolable to any single level of the vocal tract.
           Rather, constriction degree exists at a number of levels simultaneously,
           with the CD at each level in this hierarchy defining a potential natural
           class. In this section, we present some examples in which CD from
           different levels is phonologically relevant, and argue that the CD hierarchy
           is important and clarifying for any featural system, as well as for gestural
           phonology.
              We are proposing (1) that there is a universal geometry for CD in which
           all nodes in the CD hierarchy are simultaneously present, and (2) that
           different CD nodes are used to represent different natural classes. This
           approach differs from that adopted in current feature geometries, in which
           manner features such as [nasal], [sonorant], [continuant] or [consonantal]
           are usually represented at a single level in the feature hierarchy. Different
           geometries, however, choose different levels. For example, [nasal] has
           been variously considered to be a feature dependent on the highest (Root)
           node (McCarthy 1988), on the Supralaryngeal node (via a manner node)
           (Clements 1985), or on a Soft Palate node (Sagey 1986; Ladefoged
            1988a, b; Ladefoged & Halle 1988). It is possible that this variability in
           the treatment of [nasal], and other features, reflects the natural variation
           in the CD hierarchy, such that different phonological phenomena are
           captured using CD at different levels in the hierarchy.
              To see how this might work, consider the four hierarchies in Fig. 14,
           which use the tube geometry at the top of Fig. 13 to characterise the linked
           CD structures for a vowel, a lateral, a nasal and an oral stop. Since tube
           geometry plays the same role in the representation as the articulatory

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           240      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein


                            f-     la-          u           2
                            •a    's            CO
                                                3
                                                     J3S                                        13    c   is
                                         2      c
                                                o
                                                           V)
                                                                                           o.              3
                                         O           H     o                               3    O    f    h




                                                         O-O

                                                                                                     Oral Stop 161

                                                                Figure 14
                                 CD hierarchies for vowel, lateral, nasal and oral stop.


           geometry in Fig. 10, the tube hierarchies are rotated 90 degrees just as the
           anatomical hierarchy was. The circles are a graphic representation of the
           CD for each node, with the filled circles indicating CD = [clo], the wavy
           lines indicating CD = [crit], and the open circles indicating CD = [open]
           (the symbols indicate occlusion, noise and resonance, respectively, at the
           Vocal Tract level). These CD hierarchies express the various classificatory
           (featural) similarities and dissimilarities among the four segments, but
           they do so at different levels.
              For example, the nasal has the same characterisation as the vowel and
           lateral at the Supralaryngeal and Vocal Tract levels, but diverges at lower
           levels. This aspect of the CD hierarchy thus defines a phonological natural
           class consisting of nasals, laterals and vowels, where the class is charac-
           terised by Supra [open] and VT ['open'= resonance]. This natural
           class is typically represented by the feature [sonorant], although different
           feature systems select one or the other of these levels in their definition of
           sonority. For example, Ladefoged's (1988a, b) acoustic feature distinction
           of [sonorant] utilises the identity of the value in the CD hierarchy at the

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    Articulatory gestures as phonological units   241
           VT level. That is, for Ladefoged [ + sonorant] differs from [ —sonorant] in
           terms of output at the VT level. However, for Chomsky & Halle (1968)
           and Stevens (1972), it is the identity at the Supralaryngeal level that
           characterises sonority, since they consider / h / and / ? / to be sonorants
           even though they differ from the nasal, vowel and lateral at the VT level.
              At the Oral level (and below), the nasal and stop display the same linked
           CD structure, which differs from that of the lateral and that of the vowel.
           That is, nasals and stops form a natural class in having Oral [clo], whereas
           laterals and vowels form a class in having Oral [open]. This difference in
           CD resides at a lower level of the hierarchy than the Vocal Tract or
           Supralaryngeal levels. And at the lowest levels, the Tube and Gestural,
           the nasal differs from the stop, lateral and vowel in having both a Nasal
           [CD] and VEL [CD] that are [open]. Thus, constriction degree at various
           levels can serve to categorise and distinguish phonological units in
           different ways.
              Within traditional feature systems, each of the natural classes described
           above receives a separate name, which obscures the systematic relation
           among the various classes. Moreover, even in feature geometry, when
           manner features are restricted to a single level there is no principled
           representation of the hierarchical relation among the natural classes.
           However, feature geometries sometimes incorporate pieces of the CD
           hierarchy, for example, in the assignment of [nasal] and [continuant] as
           dependents of two different nodes in the hierarchy (Soft Palate and Root:•
           Sagey 1986), or the assignment of [sonorant] as part of the Root node
           itself, but [continuant] as a dependent on the Root node (McCarthy 1988).
           Note, however, that hierarchical relations among manner classes have to
           be stipulated in feature geometries, whereas such relations are inherent in
           the CD hierarchy. In addition, the percolation principles of tube geometry
           provide a mechanism for relating values of the different levels to each
           other, again something that would need to be stipulated in a hierarchy not
           based on tube geometry.
              All the levels of the CD hierarchy appear to be useful for establishing
           natural classes, and for relating the CD natural classes to one another. In
           addition, various kinds of phonological patterns, such as phonological
           alternations, can be examined in light of this hierarchy. In particular, we
           can investigate whether regularities are best expressed as processes that
           treat CD as tied to a particular gesture (as an ' input' parameter) or as a
           consequence of gestural combination at the various 'output' levels of the
           CD hierarchy. For example, the cases discussed in §2.2.1 (e.g. /k#k/->-
           /h#k/) can be best described as processes that delete entire gestures. CD
           is tied to the gesture and is deleted along with the articulator set and CL.
           This deletion automatically accounts (by percolation) for the CD changes
           at other levels of the hierarchy.
              In other cases, however, there is much overdetermination - the phono-
           logical behaviour can be described equally well from more than one
           perspective. For example, McCarthy (1988) discusses the common
           instances in which / s / - * / h / , and globalised consonants / p ' t' k'/

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           242 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           Both of these examples can be straightforwardly analysed as deletion of
           the oral gesture, as in the cases in §2.2.1. But it is also true that, in both
           cases, the Vocal Tract output CD is unchanged by the gestural deletion.
           In the first case, it remains noisy, and in the second it remains an
           occlusion. Thus, the description of the phonological behaviour could also
           focus on the (apparent) relative independence of the VT [CD] and the
           articulator set involved - the articulator set(s) changes, but CD does not.
           The equivalence of the two perspectives results from that fact that the
           percolated values of VT [CD] are the same for the two gestures alone and
           for their combination. Thus, deletion of one or the other will not change
           the VT [CD]. Examples of this kind, of which there are likely to be many,
           can be viewed from a dual perspective.
              One example of a process for which it seems (at first glance) that a dual
           perspective cannot be maintained involves assimilation. Steriade (in press)
           has argued that assimilation is problematic for the gestural approach, since
           sometimes only the place, and not the manner, features are assimilated.
           For example, in Kpelle nasals assimilate in place but not manner to a
           following stop or fricative, so that /N-f/ becomes a sequence (broadly)
           transcribed as [mv] (Sagey 1986). As Steriade points out, this separation
           of the place and manner features appears to argue against a gestural
           analysis, in which the assimilation results from increased overlap between
           the oral gesture for the fricative (LIPS [crit den]) and the velum lowering
           gesture (VEL [wide]). Since the nasal does not become a nasal fricative, it
           would appear either that there is no increased overlap, or that the LIPS
           [crit] gesture changes its CD when it overlaps the velum lowering
           gesture. From the perspective of the CD hierarchy, the Supra CD of the
           nasal is the same before and after the assimilation ([open]), and therefore
           the Supra level (or VT level) is the significant one for CD, rather than the
           Gestural level. However, the percolation principles from tube geometry
           predict that the Supra CD will be [open] even if the nasal is overlapped
           by a fricative gesture, as derived in (10):

              (l0)
                                                                   ^                           LIPS [crit]
                                       'Oral [crit] •*"
                                                              Tongue [open] •*— Central [open]
            Supra [open] •«
                                                                             "             "   VEL [wide]

           There could also be a T T gesture in the derivation that is either hidden
           or deleted - the Supra CD would still be [open]. Thus, an increase in
           gestural overlap could produce both the place assimilation as well as the
           correct CD at the Supra level, without any change of the Gestural CD.
           (An articulatory study is needed to determine whether the Gestural CD
           does indeed change.)
             The examples presented so far are processes that are either best

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory        gestures as phonological units   243
           described with CD attached firmly to a given gesture as it undergoes
           change (e.g. deletion or sliding) or are at least equally well described that
           way. However, there are phenomena whose description requires a
           ' loosening' of the relation between CD and the gesture. One such situation,
           in which the Gestural CD is effectively separated from its articulator set,
           occurs in historical change (Browman & Goldstein in press), in particular
           in the types of historical change that Ohala (1981) terms 'listener-based'
           sound changes. Such cases arise particularly when gestural overlap leads
           to ambiguity in the acoustic signal that the listener can parse into one of
           two gestural patterns. In such cases, Browman & Goldstein (in press)
           argue that there is a (historical) ' reassignment' of the constriction degree
           parameter between overlapping gestures. This analysis is used to account
           for the /x/->-/f/ changes in English words like cough, based on an
           argument originally put forth by Pagliuca (1982). Briefly, the analysis
           proposes that the [crit] descriptor for the TB gesture for / x / is reassigned
           to an overlapping LIPS gesture.
              A related synchronic situation, involving two overlapping gestures in a
           complex segment, is discussed in Sagey (1986). Her analysis suggests that
           manner features must be represented on more than a single node in a
           feature hierarchy. Specifically, Sagey demonstrates that multiple oral
           gestures cohering in a complex segment may be restricted to a single
           distinctive constriction degree. She represents this single distinctive
           constriction degree at the highest level in the hierarchy, but still must
           represent which particular articulation bears the contrastive CD. Thus,
           CD is specified at two different levels. Sagey diagrams the relation
           between the two levels by a looping arrow drawn between the distinctive
           level and the 'major' articulator making the distinctive constriction. In the
           CD hierarchy, the Oral CD would be the lowest possible distinctive level
           for these double articulations. The gesture that carries the distinctive CD
           could be marked as [head], and would automatically agree in CD with the
           mother node, as in (11):

               (11)                                      ^     Gesture [aCD]
                                                                [head]
                       Oral [aCD]

                                              \
                                                               Gesture

             Moreover, in examples such as this, the percolation principles do not
           contribute to determining the CD of the distinctive node, except in a
           negative way to be discussed shortly. Sagey argues that the distinctive CD
           cannot be predicted from physical principles, since in Margi labio-
           coronals, the coronal articulation is major, and hence in / p s / the less radical
           constriction is the distinctive constriction, rather than the more radical
           one. Thus, the relation between the Oral and Gestural levels in (11) must
           be a statement about a functional phonological unit, a gestural con-


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           244 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           stellation, rather than a statement characterising an instantaneous time
           slice in terms of tube geometry. That is, only one of the gestures in the
           constellation may bear a distinctive CD. Nevertheless, the importance of
           physical overlap relations can also be seen in this example. Maddieson
           & Ladefoged (1989) have shown that complex segments such as
           [gb] are not completely synchronous, apparently lending support to the
           distinction between phonetic ordering, on the one hand, and phonological
           unordering, on the other hand. However, we argue that the ordering of
           gestures within a complex segment is phonologically important in exactly
           the case of a phonological unit like Margi /ps/, where the distinctive value
           of CD at higher levels is not predicted from the lower level CDs by the
           percolation principles. If two gestures overlap completely (i.e. are pre-
           cisely coextensive), and there are no additional phonetic cues of the sort
           discussed in Maddieson & Ladefoged, then the percolation principles will
           determine the higher level constriction degree throughout the entire time-
           course of the phonological unit, and the distinctive CD will fail to be
           conveyed. For example, in the case of /ps/, if the two gestures were
           precisely aligned, the (distinctive) frication would never appear at the VT
           level. Only if the gestures are slightly offset can the distinctive CD be
           communicated.
              In general, the CD hierarchy affords a structure within which a
           typology of phonological processes can be developed, based on the CD
           level that seems most relevant. It is an interesting research challenge to
           develop this typology, and to ask how it is related to other ways of
           categorising the processes. For example, are there systematic differences
           in relevant CD level that correlate with whether the process involves
           spreading (sliding) rules or deletion rules, or with whether the process is
           prelexical or postlexical ?



           4 Summary
           We have argued that dynamically defined articulatory gestures are the
           appropriate units to serve as the atoms of phonological representation.
           Gestures are a natural unit, not only because they involve task-oriented
           movements of the articulators, but because they arguably emerge as pre-
           linguistic discrete units of action in infants. The use of gestures, rather
           than constellations of gestures as in Root nodes, as basic units of
           description makes it possible to characterise a variety of language patterns
           in which gestural organisation varies. Such patterns range from the
           misorderings of disordered speech through phonological rules involving
           gestural overlap and deletion to historical changes in which the overlap of
           gestures provides a crucial explanatory element.
              Gestures can participate in language patterns involving overlap because
           they are spatiotemporal in nature and therefore have internal duration. In
           addition, gestures differ from current theories of feature geometry by
           including the constriction degree as an inherent part of the gesture. Since

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                        Articulatory gestures as phonological units 245
           the gestural constrictions occur in the vocal tract, which can be charac-
           terised in terms of tube geometry, all the levels of the vocal tract will
           be constricted, leading to a constriction degree hierarchy. The values of
           the constriction degree at each higher level node in the hierarchy can be
           predicted on the basis of the percolation principles and tube geometry. In
           this way, the use of gestures as atoms can be reconciled with the use of
           constriction degree at various levels in the vocal tract (or feature geometry)
           hierarchy.
              The phonological notation developed for the gestural approach might
           usefully be incorporated, in whole or in part, into other phonologies. Five
           components of the notation were discussed, all derived from the basic
           premise that gestures are the primitive phonological unit, organised into
           gestural scores. These components include (1) constriction degree as a
           subordinate of the articulator node and (2) stiffness (duration) as a
           subordinate of the articulator node. That is, both CD and duration are
           inherent to the gesture. The gestures are arranged in gestural scores using
           (3) articulatory tiers, with (4) the relevant geometry (articulatory, tube or
           feature) indicated to the left of the score and (5) structural information
           above the score, if desired. Association lines can also be used to indicate
           how the gestures are combined into phonological units. Thus, gestures
           can serve both as characterisations of articulatory movement data and as
           the atoms of phonological representation.


           NOTES
           *       This paper has benefited from criticisms from Cathi Best, Alice Faber, Elliot
                   Saltzman, Michael Studdert-Kennedy, Eric Vatikiotis-Bateson, Doug Whalen
                   and two anonymous reviewers. Our thanks to Mark Tiede for help with manu-
                   script preparation, and Zefang Wang for help with the graphics. This work was
                   supported by NSF grant BNS-8520709 and NIH grants HD-01994 and NS-
                   13617 to Haskins Laboratories.
               [1] A simple dynamical system consists of a mass attached to the end of a spring-
                   a damped mass-spring model. If the mass is pulled, stretching the spring
                   beyond its rest length (equilibrium position), and then released, the system will
                   begin to oscillate. The resultant movement patterns of the mass will be a
                   damped sinusoid described by the solution to the equation below. When such
                   an equation is used to model the movements of coordinated sets of articulators,
                   the ' object' - motion variable - in the equation is considered to be the tract
                   variable, for example, lip aperture (LA). Thus, the sinusoidal trajectory would
                   describe how lip aperture changes over time:
                     mx + bx + k(x—xo) = o
                   where m = mass of the object, b = damping of the system, k = stiffness of the
                   spring, JCO = rest length of the spring (equilibrium position), x = instantaneous
                   displacement of the object, x = instantaneous velocity of the object, x = instan-
                   taneous acceleration of the object.
               [2] For ease of reference to the gesture, it is possible to use either a bundle of
                   gestural descriptors (or a selected subset) or gestural symbols. We have been
                   trying different approaches to the question of what gestural symbols should be;
                   our present best estimate is that gestures should be treated like archiphonemes.
                   Thus, our current proposal is to use the capitalised form of the voiced IPA

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
            246 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
                  symbol for oral gestures, capitalised and diacritised {H} for glottal gestures, and
                  {±N} for [velic clo] and [velic open] gestures, respectively. In order to clearly
                  distinguish gestural symbols from other phonetic symbols, we enclose them in
                  curly brackets: { }. This approach should permit gestural descriptions to draw
                  upon the full symbol resources of IPA, rather than attempting to develop an
                  additional set of symbols. However, we welcome comments from others on this
                  decision, particularly on the proposal to capitalise gestural symbols, a choice
                  that minimises confusion with phonemic transcriptions - but that leads to a
                  conflict with uvular symbols in the current IPA system.



           REFERENCES
           Abercrombie, D. (1967). Elements of general phonetics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh Uni-
             versity Press.
           Abry, C. & L.-J. Boe (1986). 'Laws' for lips. Speech Communication 5. 97-104.
           Anderson, J. M. & C. J. Ewen (1987). Principles of dependency phonology. Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press.
           Anderson, S. R. (1974). The organization of phonology. New York: Academic Press.
           Barry, M. C. (1985). A palatographic study of connected speech processes. Cambridge
             Papers in Phonetics and Experimental Linguistics 4. 1-16.
           Bell-Berti, F. & K. S. Harris (1981). A temporal model of speech production.
             Phonetica 38. 9-20.
           Best, C. T. & D. Wilkenfeld (1988). Phonologically-motivated substitutions in a
             20-22 month old's imitations of intervocalic alveolar stops. JASA 84. Si 14.
           Boucher, V. (1988). For a phonology without' rules': peripheral timing-structures and
             allophonic patterns in French and English. In S. Embleton (ed.) The 14th LACUS
             Forum ig8y. Lake Bluff, 111.: Linguistic Association of Canada and the U.S.
              123-140.
           Boysson-Bardies, B. de, L. Sargart & C. Durand (1984). Discernible differences in the
             babbling of infants according to target language. Journal of Child Language n . 1—15.
           Boysson-Bardies, B. de, L. Sagart, P. Halle & C. Durand (1986). Acoustic investi-
             gations of cross-linguistic variability in babbling. In Lindblom & Zetterstrom
             (1986). 113-126.
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldstein (1985). Dynamic modeling of phonetic structure. In
             Fromkin (1985). 35-53.
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldsein (1986). Towards an articulatory phonology. Phonology
              Yearbook 3. 219-252.
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldstein (1987). Tiers in Articulatory Phonology, with some
             implications for casual speech. Haskins Laboratories Status Report on Speech
             Research SR-92. 1-30. To appear in Kingston & Beckman (in press).
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldstein (1988). Some notes on syllable structure in articulatory
             phonology. Phonetica 45. 140-155.
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldstein (1989). ' Targetless' schwa: an articulatory analysis.
             Paper presented at the 2nd Conference on Laboratory Phonology, Edinburgh.
           Browman, C. P. & L. Goldstein (in press). Gestural structures and phonological
             patterns. In Mattingly & Studdert-Kennedy (in press).
           Browman, C. P., L. Goldstein, J. A. S. Kelso, P. Rubin & E. Saltzman (1984).
             Articulatory synthesis from underlying dynamics. JASA 75. S22-S23.
           Browman, C. P., L.Goldstein, E. Saltzman & C. Smith (1986). GEST: a com-
             putational model for speech production using dynamically defined articulatory
             gestures. JASA 80. S97.
           Brown, G. (1977). Listening to spoken English. London: Longman.
           Campbell, L. (1974). Phonological features: problems and proposals. Lg 50. 52-65.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                    Articulatory gestures as phonological units   247
           Catford, J. C. (1977). Fundamental problems in phonetics. Bloomington: Indiana
             University Press.
           Chomsky, N. & M. Halle (1968). The sound pattern of English. New York: Harper &
             Row.
           Clements, G. N. (1985). The geometry of phonological features. Phonology Yearbook
              2. 225-252.
           Clements, G. N. & S. J. Keyser (1983). CV phonology : a generative theory of the
             syllable. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
           Ewen, C. J. (1982). The internal structure of complex segments. In H. van der Hulst
             & N. Smith (eds.) The structure of phonological representations. Part 2. Dordrecht:
             Foris. 27-67.
           Ferguson, C. A. & C. B. Farwell (1975). Words and sounds in early language
             acquisition. Lg 51. 419-439.
           Fowler, C. A. (1980). Coarticulation and theories of extrinsic timing. JPh 8. I 13—133.
           Fowler, C. A. (1981). A relationship between coarticulation and compensatory
             shortening. Phonetica 38. 35-50.
           Fowler, C. A. (1983). Converging sources of evidence on spoken and perceived
             rhythms of speech: cyclic production of vowels in sequences of monosyllable stress
             feet. Journal of Experimental Psychology : General 112. 386-412.
           Fowler, C. A., P. Rubin, R. E. Remez & M. T. Turvey (1980). Implications for speech
             production of a general theory of action. In B. Butterworth (ed.) Language
             production. New York: Academic Press. 373-420.
           Fromkin, V. (ed.) (1985). Phonetic linguistics: essays in honor of Peter Ladefoged. New
             York: Academic Press.
           Fry, D. B. (1966). The development of the phonological system in the normal and the
             deaf child. In F. Smith & G. Miller (eds.) The genesis of language : a psycholinguistic
             approach. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 187-206.
           Fujimura, O. (1981a). Temporal organization of articulatory movements as a multi-
             dimensional phrasal structure. Phonetica 38. 66-83.
           Fujimura, O. (1981b). Elementary gestures and temporal organization: what does an
             articulatory constraint mean? In T.Myers, J. Laver & J.Anderson (eds.) The
             cognitive representation of speech. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 101-110.
           Gimson, A. C. (1962). An introduction to the pronunciation of English. London: Arnold.
           Glass, L. & M. C. Mackey (1988). From clocks to chaos. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
             University Press.
           Goldstein, L. & C. P. Browman (1986). Representation of voicing contrasts using
             articulatory gestures. JPh 14. 339-342.
           Gregores, E. & J. A. Suarez (1967). A description of colloquial Guarani. The Hague:
             Mouton.
           Guy, G. R. (1980). Variation in the group and the individual: the case of final stop
             deletion. In W. Labov (ed.) Locating language in time and space. New York:
             Academic Press. 1-36.
           Haken, H., J. A. S. Kelso & H. Bunz (1985). A theoretical model of phase transitions
             in human hand movements. Biological Cybernetics 51. 347-356.
           Halle, M. (1982). On distinctive features and their articulatory implementation.
             NLLT 1. 91-105.
           Halle, M. & K. Stevens (1971). A note on laryngeal features. MIT Quarterly Progress
             Report xi. 198-213.
           Hammond, M. (1988). On deriving the well-formedness condition. LI 19. 319-325.
           Hardcastle, W. J. & P. J. Roach (1979). An instrumental investigation of coarticulation
             in stop consonant sequences. In P. Hollien & H. Hollien (eds.) Current issues in the
             phonetic sciences. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 531-540.
           Hayes, B. (1986). Assimilation as spreading in Toba Batak. LI 17. 467-499.



https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
            248 Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           Jakobson, R., C. G. M. Fant & M. Halle (1969). Preliminaries to speech analysis : the
             distinctive features and their correlates. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
           Jespersen, O. (1914). Lehrbuch der Phonetik. Leipzig: Teubner.
           Keating, P. A. (1985). CV phonology, experimental phonetics, and coarticulation.
               UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 62. 1—13.
           Keating, P. A. (1988). Palatals as complex segments: X-ray evidence. UCLA Working
             Papers in Phonetics 69. 77-91.
           Kelso, J. A. S. & B. Tuller (1987). Intrinsic time in speech production: theory,
             methodology, and preliminary observations. In E. Keller & M. Gopnik (eds.) Motor
             and sensory processes of language. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 203-222.
           Kelso, J. A. S., E. Vatikiotis-Bateson, E. L. Saltzman & B. Kay (1985). A qualitative
             dynamic analysis of reiterant speech production: phase portraits, kinematics, and
             dynamic modeling. jfASA 77. 266-280.
           Kent, R. D. (1983). The segmental organization of speech. In MacNeilage (1983).
             57-89.
           Kent, R. D. & A. D. Murray (1982). Acoustic features of infant vocalic utterances at
             3, 6, and 9 months. JfASA 72. 353-365.
           Kingston, J. & M. E. Beckman (eds.) (in press). Papers in laboratory phonology 1 :
             between the grammar and the physics of speech. Cambridge: Cambridge University
             Press.
           Kohler, K. (1976). Die Instabilitat wortfinaler Alveolarplosive im Deutschen: eine
             elektropalatographische Untersuchung. Phonetica 33. 1-30.
           Koopmans-van Beinum, F. J. & J. M. van der Stelt (1986). Early stages in the
             development of speech movements. In Lindblom & Zetterstrom (1986). 37-50.
           Krakow, R. A. (1989). The articulatory organization of syllables : a kinematic analysis of
             labial and velar gestures. PhD dissertation, Yale University.
           Ladefoged, P. (1980). What are linguistic sounds made of? Lg 56. 485-502.
           Ladefoged, P. (1982). A course in phonetics. 2nd edn. New York: Harcourt Brace
             Jovanovich.
           Ladefoged, P. (1988a). Hierarchical features of the International Phonetic Alphabet.
             UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 70. 1-12.
           Ladefoged, P. (1988b). The many interfaces between phonetics and phonology.
             UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 70. 13-23.
           Ladefoged, P. & M. Halle (1988). Some major features of the International Phonetic
             Alphabet. Lg 64. 577-582.
           Ladefoged, P. & I. Maddieson (1986). Some of the sounds of the world's languages.
             UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 64. 1—137.
           Lass, R. (1984). Phonology: an introduction to basic concepts. Cambridge: Cambridge
             University Press.
           Liberman, A. M. & I. G. Mattingly (1985). The motor theory of speech perception
             revised. Cognition 21. 1-36.
           Lieberman, P. (1984). The biology and evolution of language. Cambridge, Mass.:
             Harvard University Press.
           Lindau, M. (1978). Vowel features. Lg 54. 541-563.
           Lindblom, B. (1986). Phonetic universals in vowel systems. In J. J. Ohala & J. J.
             Jaeger (eds.) Experimental phonology. Orlando, Fl.: Academic Press. 13-44.
           Lindblom, B., P. F. MacNeilage & M. Studdert-Kennedy (1983). Self-organizing
             processes and the explanation of phonological universals. In B. Butterworth, B.
             Comrie & O. Dahl (eds.) Explanations of linguistic universals. The Hague: Mouton.
             182-203.
           Lindblom, B. & R. Zetterstrom (eds.) (1986). Precursors of early speech. Basingstoke:
             MacMillan.
           Linker, W. (1982). Articulatory and acoustic correlates of labial activity in vowels: a
             cross-linguistic study. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 56. 1—134.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                         Articulatory gestures as phonological units 249
            Locke, J. L. (1983). Phonological acquisition and change. New York: Academic Press.
            Locke, J. L. (1986). The linguistic significance of babbling. In Lindblom &
              Zetterstrom (1986). 143-160.
            Lombardi, L. (1987). On the representation of the affricate. Ms, University of
              Massachusetts, Amherst.
            Lynch, J. (1983). On the Kuman liquids. Language and Linguistics in Melanesia 14.
               98-112.
            McCarthy, J. J. (1988). Feature geometry and dependency: a review. Phonetica 45.
              84-108.
            McCarthy, J. J. (1989). Linear ordering in phonological representation. LI 20. 71-99,
            MacNeilage, P. F. (ed.) (1983). The production of speech. New York: Springer.
            Maddieson, I. (1987). Revision of the IPA: linguo-labials as a test case. Journal of the
              International Phonetic Association 17. 26-30.
            Maddieson, I. & P. Ladefoged (1989). Multiply articulated segments and the feature
              hierarchy. UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics 72. 116-138.
            Marshall, R. C , J. Gandour & J. Windsor (1988). Selective impairment of phonation:
              a case study. Brain and Language 35. 313-339.
            Mattingly, I. G. & M. Studdert-Kennedy (eds.) (in press). Modularity and the motor
              theory of speech perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
            Nittrouer, S., M. Studdert-Kennedy & R. S. McGowan (1989). The emergence of
              phonetic segments: evidence from the spectral structure of fricative-vowel syllables
              spoken by children and adults. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research 32.
               120-132.
           Nittrouer, S., K. Munhall, J. A. S. Kelso, B. Tuller & K. S. Harris (1988). Patterns of
              interarticulator phasing and their relation to linguistic structure. JASA 84.
              1653—1661.
           Ohala, J. J. (1975). Phonetic explanations for nasal sound patterns. In C. A. Ferguson,
              L. M. Hyman & J. J. Ohala (eds.) Nasalfest. Stanford: Stanford University.
              289-316.
           Ohala, J. J. (1981). The listener as a source of sound change. In C. S. Masek, R. A.
             Hendrick & M. F. Miller (eds.) Papers from the parassesion on language and behavior.
             Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society. 178-203.
           Ohala, J. J. (1983). The origin of sound patterns in vocal tract constraints. In
              MacNeilage (1983). 189-216.
           Ohala, J. J. (1985). Around 'flat'. In Fromkin (1985). 223-241.
           Ohala, J. J. & J. Lorentz (1977). The story of [w]: an exercise in the phonetic
             explanation for sound patterns. BLS 3. 577-599.
           Oiler, D. K. (1986). Metaphonology and infant vocalizations. In Lindblom & Zet-
             terstrom (1986). 21-36.
           Oiler, D. K. & R. E. Eilers (1982). Similarity of babbling in Spanish- and English-
             learning babies. Journal of Child Language 9. 565-577.
           Oiler, D. K. & R. E. Eilers (1988). The role of audition in infant babbling. Child
             Development 59. 441-449.
           Ostry, D. J. & K. Munhall (1985). Control of rate and duration of speech movements.
             JASA 77. 640-648.
           Pagliuca, W. (1982). Prolegomena to a theory of articulatory evolution. PhD dissertation,
             State University of New York at Buffalo. Ann Arbor: University Microfilms
             International.
           Pike, K. L. (1943). Phonetics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
           Plotkin, V. Y. (1976). Systems of ultimate units. Phonetica 33. 81-92. •
           Principles of the International Phonetic Association (1949, reprinted 1978). London:
             University College.
           Recasens, D. (in preparation). The articulatory characteristics of alveolopalatal and
             palatal consonants. New Haven: Haskins Laboratories.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
           250      Catherine P. Browman and Louis Goldstein
           Rubin, P., T. Baer&P. Mermelstein (1981). An articulatory synthesizer for perceptual
             research. JASA 70. 321-328.
           Sagey, E. C. (1986). The representation offeatures and relations in non-linear phonology.
             PhD dissertation, MIT.
           Sagey, E. C. (1988). On the ill-formedness of crossing association lines. LI 19.
               109-118.
           Saltzman, E. (1986). Task dynamic coordination of the speech articulators: a pre-
             liminary model. In H. Heuer & C. Fromm (eds.) Generation and modulation of action
             patterns. New York: Springer. 129-144.
           Saltzman, E., L. Goldstein, C. P. Browman & P. E. Rubin (1988). Dynamics of
             gestural blending during speech production. Paper presented at 1st Annual
              International Neural Network Society (INNS), Boston.
           Saltzman, E. & J. A. S. Kelso (1987). Skilled actions: a task dynamic approach.
             Psychological Review 94. 84-106.
           Saltzman, E. & K. Munhall (in press). A dynamical approach to gestural patterning in
             speech production. Ecological Psychology.
           Saltzman, E., P. E. Rubin, L. Goldstein & C. P. Browman (1987). Task-dynamic
             modeling of interarticulator coordination. JASA 82. Si5.
           Schadeberg, T. C. (1982). Nasalization in UMbundu. Journal of African Languages
             and Linguistics 4. 109-132.
           Schmidt, R. C , C. Carello & M. T. Turvey (1987). Visual coupling of biological
             oscillators. PAW Review 2. 22-24.
           Selkirk, E. (1988). A two-root theory of length. To appear in NELS 19.
           Shockey, L. (1974). Phonetic and phonological properties of connected speech. Ohio
             State Working Papers in Linguistics 17. iv-143.
           Steriade, D. (in press). Gestures and autosegments: comments on Browman and
             Goldstein's 'Gestures in articulatory phonology'. In Kingston & Beckman (in
             press).
           Stevens, K. N. (1972). The quantal nature of speech: evidence from articulatory-
             acoustic data. In E. E. David & P. B. Denes (eds.) Human communications : a unified
             view. New York: McGraw-Hill. 51-66.
           Stevens, K. N. (1989). On the quantal nature of speech. JPh 17. 3-45.
           Stevens, K. N., S. J. Keyser & H. Kawasaki (1986). Toward a phonetic and
             phonological theory of redundant features. In J. S. Perkell & D. H. Klatt (eds.)
             Invariance and variability in speech processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
             426-449.
           Straight, H. S. (1976). The acquisition of Maya phonology : variation in Yucatec child
             language. New York: Garland.
           Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1987). The phoneme as a perceptuomotor structure. In A.
             Allport, D. MacKay, W. Prinz & E. Scheerer (eds.) Language perception and
             production. London: Academic Press. 67-84.
           Thelen, E. (1981). Rhythmical behavior in infancy: an ethological perspective.
             Developmental Psychology 17. 237-257.
           Thompson, J. M. T. & H. B. Stewart (1976). Nonlinear dynamics and chaos. New
             York: John Wiley & Sons.
           Thrainsson, H. (1978). On the phonology of Icelandic preaspiration. Nordic Journal of
             Linguistics 1. 3-54.
           Vatikiotis-Bateson, E. (1988). Linguistic structure and articulatory dynamics. Indiana
             University Linguistics Club.
           Vennemann, T. & P. Ladefoged (1973). Phonetic features and phonological features.
             Lingua 32. 61-74.
           Vihman, M. M. (in press). Ontogeny of phonetic gestures: speech production. In
             Mattingly & Studdert-Kennedy (in press).


https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
                                                   Articulatory        gestures as phonological units   251
           Vihman, M. M., M. A. Macken, R. Miller, H. Simmons & J. Miller (1985). From
             babbling to speech: a re-assessment of the continuity issue. Lg 61. 397-445•
           Wood, S. (1982). X-ray and model studies of vowel articulation. Working Papers in
             Linguistics, Lund University 23.




https://doi.org/10.1017/S0952675700001019 Published online by Cambridge University Press
